STAFFING THE PROJECT	
Staffing the project includes determining how many people should be assigned to the project, matching people’s skills with the needs of the project, motivating them to meet the project’s objectives, and minimizing the conflict that will occur over time. The deliverables for this part of project management are a staffing plan, which describes the number and kinds of people who will work on the project, the overall reporting structure, and the project charter, which describes the project’s objectives and rules. However, before describing the development of a staffing plan, how to motivate people, and how to handle conflict, we describe a set of char- acteristics of jelled teams.
Characteristics of a Jelled Team10
The idea of a jelled team has existed for a long time. Most (if not all) student groups are not representative of the idea of a jelled team, and you may have never had the opportunity to appreciate the effectiveness of a true team. In fact, DeMarco and Lister point out that teams are not created; they are grown. Typically, in class projects, students are assigned or asked to form a group, which makes the ability to grow a team very limited. However, growing devel- opment teams is crucial in information systems development. The whole set of agile software development approaches hinges on growing jelled teams. Otherwise, agile development approaches would totally fail.
According to DeMarco and Lister,11 “[a] jelled team is a group of people so strongly knit that the whole is greater than the sum of the parts. The production of such a team is greater than that of the same people working in unjelled form.” They go on to state that a jelled “team can become almost unstoppable, a juggernaut for success.” When is the last time that you worked with a group on a class project that could be described “a juggernaut for success”? Demarco and Lister identify five characteristics of a jelled team.

10 The material in the section is based on T. DeMarco and T. Lister, Peopleware: Productive Projects and Teams, 2nd Ed. (New York: Dorset House, 1999); P. Lencioni, The Five Dysfunctions of a Team: A Leadership Fable (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2002).
11 T. DeMarco and T. Lister, Peopleware: Productive Projects and Teams, 2nd Ed., p. 123.
 

First, jelled teams have a very low turnover during a project. Typically, members of a jelled team feel a responsibility to the other team members. This responsibility is felt so intensely that for a member to leave the team, the member would feel that they were letting the team down and that they were breaking a bond of trust.
Second, jelled teams have a strong sense of identity. In many classes, when you are part of a group, the group chooses some cute name to identify the group and differentiate it from the other groups. However, in this case, it is not simply the choosing of a name. It is instead evolv- ing every member into something that only exists within the team. This can be seen when members of the team tend to do non–work-related activities together, e.g., do lunch together as a team or form a basketball team composed of only members of the development team.
Third, the strong sense of identity tends to lead the team into feeling a sense of eliteness. The members of a jelled development team almost have a swagger about the way they relate to nonteam employees. Good examples that come to mind that possess this sense of eliteness outside of the scope of information systems development teams are certain sports teams,
U.S. Navy Seal teams, or big city police force SWAT teams. In all three examples, each team member is highly competent in his or her specialty area, and each other team member knows (not thinks) that he or she can depend on the team members performing his or her individual jobs with a very high-level of skill.
Fourth, during the development process, jelled teams feel that the team owns the infor- mation system being developed and not any one individual member. In many ways, you could almost say that jelled teams are a little communistic in nature. By this we mean that the individ- ual contributions to the effort are not important to a true team. The only things that matter are the output of the team. However, this is not to imply that a member who does not deliver his or her fair share will not go unpunished. In a jelled team, any member who is not producing is actu- ally breaking his or her bond of trust with the other team members (see the first characteristic). The final characteristic of a jelled team is that team members really enjoy (have fun) doing their work. The members actually like to go to work and be with their team members. Much of this can be attributed to the level of challenge they receive. If the project is challeng- ing and the members of the team are going to learn something from completing the project,
the members of a jelled team will enjoy tackling the project.
When a team jells, they will avoid the five dysfunctions of a team defined by Lencioni. Lack of trust is the primary cause of a team becoming dysfunctional. Lencioni describes four other causes of a team becoming dysfunctional that can come from the lack of trust. First, dysfunctional teams fear conflict, whereas members of a jelled team never fear conflict.12 Going to a member of a jelled team and admitting that you do not know how to do something is no big deal. In fact, it provides a method for the team member to help out, which would increase the level of trust between the two members. Second, dysfunctional teams do not have a commitment to the team from the individual members. Instead, they tend to focus on their individual performance instead of the team’s performance. This can even be to the detriment of the development team. Obviously, this is not an issue for jelled teams. Third, dysfunctional teams try to avoid accountability. With jelled teams, accountability is not an issue. Members of a jelled team feel a high level of responsibility to the other team members. No team mem- ber ever wants to let down the team. Furthermore, owing to the bond that holds jelled teams together, no member has any problem with holding other members accountable for their per- formance (or lack of performance). Fourth, dysfunctional teams do not pay attention to the team’s results. Again, in this case, the cause of this dysfunction is that the individual members only focus on their individual goals. From a team management perspective, the team leader should focus on getting the goals of the team aligned; a jelled team will attain the goals.
12 When conflict occurs, it is necessary to address it in an effective manner. We discuss how to handle conflict later in the chapter.
 

Staffing Plan
The first step to staffing is determining the average number of staff needed for the project. To calculate this figure, divide the total person-months of effort by the optimal schedule. So to complete a forty-person-month project in ten months, a team should have an average of four full-time staff members, although this may change over time as different specialists enter and leave the team (e.g., business analysts, programmers, technical writers).
Many times, the temptation is to assign more staff to a project to shorten the project’s length, but this is not a wise move. Adding staff resources does not translate into increased productivity; staff size and productivity share a disproportionate relationship, mainly because it is more difficult to coordinate a large number of staff members. The more a team grows, the more difficult it becomes to manage. Imagine how easy it is to work on a two-person project team: The team members share a single line of communication. But adding two peo- ple increases the number of communication lines to six, and greater increases lead to more dramatic gains in communication complexity. Figure 2-21 illustrates the impact of adding team members to a project team.
One way to reduce efficiency losses on teams is to understand the complexity that is cre- ated in numbers and to build in a reporting structure that tempers its effects. The general rule

is to keep team sizes to fewer than eight to ten people; therefore, if more people are needed, create sub-teams. In this way, the project manager can keep the communication effective within small teams, which, in turn, communicate to a contact at a higher level in the project. After the project manager understands how many people are needed for the project,
he or she creates a staffing plan that lists the roles and the proposed reporting structure that are required for the project. Typically, a project has one project manager who oversees the overall progress of the development effort, with the core of the team comprising the various types of analysts described in Chapter 1. A functional lead is usually assigned to manage a group of analysts, and a technical lead oversees the progress of a group of programmers and more technical staff members.
There are many structures for project teams; Figure 2-22 illustrates one possible config- uration of a project team. After the roles are defined and the structure is in place, the project manager needs to think about which people can fill each role. Often, one person fills more than one role on a project team.
When you make assignments, remember that people have technical skills and interper- sonal skills, and both are important on a project. Technical skills are useful when working with technical tasks (e.g., programming in Java) and in trying to understand the various roles that technology plays in the particular project (e.g., how a Web server should be con- figured on the basis of a projected number of hits from customers). Interpersonal skills, on the other hand, include interpersonal and communication abilities that are used when dealing with business users, senior management executives, and other members of the project team. They are particularly critical when performing the requirements-gathering activities and when addressing organizational feasibility issues. Each project requires unique technical and interpersonal skills.
Ideally, project roles are filled with people who have the right skills for the job. However, the people who fit the roles best might not be available; they may be working on other projects, or they might not exist in the company. Therefore, assigning project team members really is a combination of finding people with the appropriate skill sets and finding people who are available. When the skills of the available project team members do not match what is actually required by the project, the project manager has several options to improve the situation. First, people can be pulled off other projects, and resources can be shuffled around. This is the most disruptive approach from the organization’s perspective. Another approach is to use outside help—such as a consultant or contractor—to train team members and start them off on the right foot. Mentoring may also be an option; a project team member can be sent to work on another similar project so that he or she can return with skills to apply to the current job.

Motivation
Assigning people to tasks isn’t enough; project managers need to motivate the people to ensure a project’s success. Motivation has been found to be the number one influence on people’s performance,13 but determining how to motivate the team can be quite difficult. You might think that good project managers motivate their staff by rewarding them with money and bonuses, but most project managers agree that this is the last thing that should be done. The more often managers reward team members with money, the more they expect it—and most times monetary motivation won’t work. Pink14 has suggested a set of principles to follow to motivate individuals in twenty-first century firms. In this section, we adapt his suggestions to information systems development teams.
Pink suggests considering using some form of the 20 percent time rule to motivate individuals. This rule suggests that 20 percent of an employee’s time should be spent on some idea in which he or she believes. The project does not have to be related to the project at hand. On the surface, this sounds like a colossal waste of time, but this idea should not be discarded. Google’s Gmail and Google News were developed using the 20 percent time rule. If 20 percent sounds too high, Pink suggests that you consider 10 percent to begin with.
He recommends that firms should be willing to fund small “Now That” awards. These awards are given as small signs of appreciation for doing a great job. However, these awards are not given by a manager to an employee but from an employee to a peer of the employee. The awards are monetary, but they are very small, typically $50. As such, they really are not relevant from a mon- etary perspective. However, they are very relevant because they are given by one of the employee’s colleagues to show that some action that the employee did was appreciated.
Pink endorses the idea of applying Robert Reich’s (President’s Clinton’s Secretary of Labor) pronoun test. If an employee (or team member) refers to the firm (the team) as “they,” then there is the real possibility that the employee feels disengaged or possibly alienated. On the other hand, when employees refer to the firm as “we,” they obviously feel like they are part of the organization. From a team perspective, this could be an indication that the team has begun to jell.
Pink suggests that management should periodically consider giving each employee a day on which he or she can work on anything he or she wants. In some ways, this is related to the 20 percent rule. It does not necessarily require one day a week (20 percent), but it does require some deliverable. The deliverable can be a new utility program that could be used by lots of different projects, it could be a new prototype of a new software product, or it could be an improvement for a business process that is used internally. The goal is to provide team members with the ability to focus on interesting and challenging problems that might (or might not) provide results to the firm’s bottom line. Regardless, it demonstrates an amount of trust and respect that the firm has for its employees.
He recommends that managers remove the issue of compensation from the motivation equation. By this, he means that all employees should be paid a sufficient amount so that com- pensation awards are not an issue. Technical employees on project teams are much more moti- vated by recognition, achievement, the work itself, responsibility, advancement, and the chance to learn new skills.15 Simplistic financial awards, such as raises that are perceived as being unjust, can actually demotivate the overall team and lower overall performance.

13 Barry W. Boehm, Software Engineering Economics (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1981). One of the best books on managing project teams is that by Tom DeMarco and Timothy Lister, Peopleware: Productive Projects and Teams (New York: Dorset House, 1987).
14 D. H. Pink, Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us (New York, NY: Riverhead Books, 2009).
15 F. H. Hertzberg, “One More Time: How Do You Motivate Employees?” Harvard Business Review (January– February 1968).
 

He advocates that twenty-first century bosses (team leaders) need to be willing to give up control. Many of the agile development approaches make similar suggestions. Appelo16 suggests that an open door policy that is supported by a team leader actually can be self-defeating. In the case of software development teams, an open door policy implies that the team leader has a door that can be left open, whereas the poor individual team member does not have an office with a door. In this case, Appelo suggests that the team leader move from the office with a door to the same shared space in which the team resides. One of Pink’s other ideas is for the team leader to not use controlling language such as telling the team member that he or she “must” do some- thing. Instead, the team leader should ask the team member to “consider” or “think about” the idea. In some ways, a true team leader should never receive credit for any ideas associated with the team. Instead, a team leader should make suggestions and encourage the team members to consider ideas and, most importantly, let the team member and the team receive the credit.
Pink provides evidence that intrinsic motivation is very important for twenty-first century knowledge workers. Pink suggests that intrinsically motivating individuals requires providing them with a degree of autonomy, supporting them in such a way that they can master their area of expertise, and encouraging them to pursue projects with a purpose. Providing team members with autonomy relates to the jelled team concept of trust. Team leaders need to trust the team members to deliver the software for which they are responsible. Supporting team members so that they can master their area of expertise can be as simple as providing support to attend confer- ences, seminars, and training sessions that deal with the member’s area of expertise. It also could imply providing the team member with a high-end development environment. For example, when building information visualization and virtual reality applications, special hardware and software environments can make it much easier to master the technology to develop the appli- cation. Finally, today it is very important for team members to feel that what they are doing can make a difference. A team leader should encourage the team members to tackle problems that can impact people’s lives. This can easily be accomplished through the use of the 20 percent rule.
Handling Conflict
The third component of staffing is organizing the project to minimize conflict among group members. Group cohesiveness (the attraction that members feel to the group and to other members) contributes more to productivity than do project members’ individual capabil- ities or experiences.17 Clearly defining the roles on the project and holding team members accountable for their tasks are a good way to begin mitigating potential conflict on a project. Some project managers develop a project charter, which lists the project’s norms and ground rules. For example, the charter may describe when the project team should be at work, when staff meetings will be held, how the group will communicate with each other, and what are the procedures for updating the workplan as tasks are completed. Figure 2-23 lists additional techniques that can be used at the start of a project to keep conflict to a minimum.

