sound.
																Paulie	Gatto	jumped	into	the	car	and	started	the	motor.	The	two	big men	were	beating	Moonan	to	jelly.	They	did	so	with	frightening	deliberation,	as if	they	had	all	the	time	in	the	world.	They	did	not	throw	punches	in	flurries	but in	timed,	slow-motion	sequences	that	carried	the	full	weight	of	their	massive bodies.	Each	blow	landed	with	a	splat	of	flesh	splitting	open.	Gatto	got	a glimpse	of	Moonan’s	face.	It	was	unrecognizable.	The	two	men	left	Moonan lying	on	the	sidewalk	and	turned	their	attention	to	Wagner.	Wagner	was	trying	to get	to	his	feet	and	he	started	to	scream	for	help.	Someone	came	out	of	the	bar and	the	two	men	had	to	work	faster	now.	They	clubbed	Wagner	to	his	knees. One	of	the	men	took	his	arm	and	twisted	it,	then	kicked	him	in	the	spine.	There was	a	cracking	sound	and	Wagner’s	scream	of	agony	brought	windows	open	all along	the	street.	The	two	men	worked	very	quickly.	One	of	them	held	Wagner up	by	using	his	two	hands	around	Wagner’s	head	like	a	vise.	The	other	man smashed	his	huge	fist	into	the	fixed	target.	There	were	more	people	coming	out of	the	bar	but	none	tried	to	interfere.	Paulie	Gatto	yelled,	“Come	on,	enough.” The	two	big	men	jumped	into	the	car	and	Paulie	gunned	it	away,	Somebody would	describe	the	car	and	read	the	license	plates	but	it	didn’t	matter.	It	was	a stolen	California	plate	and	there	were	one	hundred	thousand	black	Chevy	sedans in	New	York	City.
															
Chapter	2
	
																Tom	Hagen	went	to	his	law	office	in	the	city	on	Thursday	morning.	He planned	to	catch	up	on	his	paper	work	so	as	to	have	everything	cleared	away	for the	meeting	with	Virgil	Sollozzo	on	Friday.	A	meeting	of	such	importance	that he	had	asked	the	Don	for	a	full	evening	of	talk	to	prepare	for	the	proposition they	knew	Sollozzo	would	offer	the	family	business.	Hagen	wanted	to	have	all little	details	cleared	away	so	that	he	could	go	to	that	preparatory	meeting	with	an unencumbered	mind.
																The	Don	had	not	seemed	surprised	when	Hagen	returned	from California	late	Tuesday	evening	and	told	him	the	results	of	the	negotiations	with Woltz.	He	had	made	Hagen	go	over	every	detail	and	grimaced	with	distaste when	Hagen	told	about	the	beautiful	little	girl	and	her	mother.	He	had	murmured “infamita,	“	his	strongest	disapproval.	He	had	asked	Hagen	one	final	question. “Does	this	man	have	real	balls?”
																Hagen	considered	exactly	what	the	Don	meant	by	this	question.	Over the	years	he	had	learned	that	the	Don’s	values	were	so	different	from	those	of most	people	that	his	words	also	could	have	a	different	meaning.	Did	Woltz	have character?	Did	he	have	a	strong	will?	He	most	certainly	did,	but	that	was	not what	the	Don	was	asking.	Did	the	movie	producer	have	the	courage	not	to	be bluffed?	Did	he	have	the	willingness	to	suffer	heavy	financial	loss	delay	on	his movies	would	mean,	the	scandal	of	his	big	star	exposed	as	a	user	of	heroin? Again	the	answer	was	yes.	But	again	this	was	not	what	the	Don	meant.	Finally Hagen	translated	the	question	properly	in	his	mind.	Did	Jack	Woltz	have	the balls	to	risk	everything,	to	run	the	chance	of	losing	all	on	a	matter	of	principle, on	a	matter	of	honor;	for	revenge?
																Hagen	smiled.	He	did	it	rarely	but	now	he	could	not	resist	jesting	with the	Don.	“You’re	asking	if	he	is	a	Sicilian.”	The	Don	nodded	his	head pleasantly,	acknowledging	the	flattering	witticism	and	its	truth.	“No,”	Hagen said.
																That	had	been	all.	The	Don	had	pondered	the	question	until	the	next day.	On	Wednesday	afternoon	he	had	called	Hagen	to	his	home	and	given	him his	instructions.	The	instructions	had	consumed	the	rest	of	Hagen’s	working	day and	left	him	dazed	with	admiration.	There	was	no	question	in	his	mind	that	the Don	had	solved	the	problem,	that	Woltz	would	call	him	this	morning	with	the news	that	Johnny	Fontane	had	the	starring	part	in	his	new	war	movie.
																At	that	moment	the	phone	did	ring	but	it	was	Amerigo	Bonasera.	The undertaker’s	voice	was	trembling	with	gratitude.	He	wanted	Hagen	to	convey	to the	Don	his	undying	friendship.	The	Don	had	only	to	call	on	him.	He,	Amerigo Bonasera,	would	lay	down	his	life	for	the	blessed	Godfather.	Hagen	assured	him that	the	Don	would	be	told.
																The	Daily	News	had	carried	a	middle-page	spread	of	Jerry	Wagner	and Kevin	Moonan	lying	in	the	street.	The	photos	were	expertly	gruesome,	they seemed	to	be	pulps	of	human	beings.	Miraculously,	said	the	News,	they	were both	still	alive	though	they	would	both	be	in	the	hospital	for	months	and	would require	plastic	surgery.	Hagen	made	a	note	to	tell	Clemenza	that	something should	be	done	for	Paulie	Gat	to.	He	seemed	to	know	his	job.
																Hagen	worked	quickly	and	efficiently	for	the	next	three	hours consolidating	earning	reports	from	the	Don’s	real	estate	company,	his	olive	oil importing	business	and	his	construction	firm.	None	of	them	were	doing	well	but with	the	war	over	they	should	all	become	rich	producers.	He	had	almost forgotten	the	Johnny	Fontane	problem	when	his	secretary	told	him	California was	calling.	He	felt	a	little	thrill	of	anticipation	as	he	picked	up	the	phone	and said,	“Hagen	here.”
																The	voice	that	came	over	the	phone	was	unrecognizable	with	hate	and passion.	“You	fucking	bastard,”	Woltz	screamed.	“I’ll	have	you	all	in	jail	for	a hundred	years.	I’ll	spend	every	penny	I	have	to	get	you.	I’ll	get	that	Johnny Fontane’s	balls	cut	off,	do	you	hear	me,	you	guinea	tuck?”
																Hagen	said	kindly,	“I’m	German-Irish.”	There	was	a	long	pause	and then	a	click	of	the	phone	being	hung	up.	Hagen	smiled.	Not	once	had	Woltz uttered	a	threat	against	Don	Corleone	himself.	Genius	had	its	rewards.
															
																Jack	Woltz	always	slept	alone.	He	had	a	bed	big	enough	for	ten	people and	a	bedroom	large	enough	for	a	movie	ballroom	scene,	but	he	had	slept	alone since	the	death	of	his	first	wife	ten	years	before.	This	did	not	mean	he	no	longer used	women.	He	was	physically	a	vigorous	man	despite	his	age,	but	he	could	be aroused	now	only	by	very	young	girls	and	had	learned	that	a	few	hours	in	the evening	were	all	the	youth	his	body	and	his	patience	could	tolerate.
																On	this	Thursday	morning,	for	some	reason,	he	awoke	early.	The	light of	dawn	made	his	huge	bedroom	as	misty	as	a	foggy	meadowland.	Far	down	at the	foot	of	his	bed	was	a	familiar	shape	and	Woltz	struggled	up	on	his	elbows	to
get	a	clearer	look.	It	had	the	shape	of	a	horse’s	head.	Still	groggy,	Woltz	reached and	flicked	on	the	night	table	lamp.
																The	shock	of	what	he	saw	made	him	physically	ill.	It	seemed	as	if	a great	sledgehammer	had	struck	him	on	the	chest,	his	heartbeat	jumped	erratically and	he	became	nauseous.	His	vomit	spluttered	on	the	thick	bear	rug.
																Severed	from	its	body,	the	black	silky	head	of	the	great	horse Khartoum	was	stuck	fast	in	a	thick	cake	of	blood.	White,	reedy	tendons	showed. Froth	covered	the	muzzle	and	those	apple-sized	eyes	that	had	glinted	like	gold, were	mottled	the	color	of	rotting	fruit	with	dead,	hemorrhaged	blood.	Woltz	was struck	by	a	purely	animal	terror	and	out	of	that	terror	he	screamed	for	his servants	and	out	of	that	terror	he	called	Hagen	to	make	his	uncontrolled	threats. His	maniacal	raving	alarmed	the	butler,	who	called	Woltz’s	personal	physician and	his	second	in	command	at	the	studio.	But	Woltz	regained	his	senses	before they	arrived.
																He	had	been	profoundly	shocked.	What	kind	of	man	could	destroy	an animal	worth	six	hundred	thousand	dollars?	Without	a	word	of	warning.	Without any	negotiation	to	have	the	act,	its	order,	countermanded.	The	ruthlessness,	the sheer	disregard	for	any	values,	implied	a	man	who	considered	himself completely	his	own	law,	even	his	own	God.	And	a	man	who	backed	up	this	kind of	will	with	the	power	and	cunning	that	held	his	own	stable	security	force	of	no account.	For	by	this	time	Woltz	had	learned	that	the	horse’s	body	had	obviously been	heavily	drugged	before	someone	leisurely	hacked	the	huge	triangular	head off	with	an	ax.	The	men	on	night	duty	claimed	that	they	had	heard	nothing.	To Woltz	this	seemed	impossible.	They	could	be	made	to	talk.	They	had	been bought	off	and	they	coul_che	made	to	tell	who	had	done	the	buying.
																Woltz	was	not	a	stupid	man,	he	was	merely	a	supremely	egotistical one.	He	had	mistaken	the	power	he	wielded	in	his	world	to	be	more	potent	than the	power	of	Don	Corleone.	He	had	merely	needed	some	proof	that	this	was	not true.	He	understood	this	message.	That	despite	all	his	wealth,	despite	all	his contacts	with	the	President	of	the	United	States,	despite	all	his	claims	of friendship	with	the	director	of	the	FBI,	an	obscure	importer	of	Italian	olive	oil would	have	him	killed.	Would	actually	have	him	killed!	Because	he	wouldn’t
give	Johnny	Fontane	a	movie	part	he	wanted.	It	was	incredible.	People	didn’t have	any	right	to	act	that	way.	There	couldn’t	be	any	kind	of	world	if	people acted	that	way.	It	was	insane.	It	meant	you	couldn’t	do	what	you	wanted	with your	own	money,	with	the	companies	you	owned,	the	power	you	had	to	give orders.	It	was	ten	times	worse	than	communism.	It	had	to	be	smashed.	It	must never	be	allowed.
																Woltz	let	the	doctor	give	him	a	very	mild	sedation.	It	helped	him	calm down	again	and	to	think	sensibly.	What	really	shocked	him	was	the	casualness with	which	this	man	Corleone	had	ordered	the	destruction	of	a	world-famous horse	worth	six	hundred	thousand	dollars.	Six	hundred	thousand	dollars!	And that	was	just	for	openers.	Woltz	shuddered.	He	thought	of	this	life	he	had	built up.	He	was	rich.	He	could	have	the	most	beautiful	women	in	the	world	by crooking	his	finger	and	promising	a	contract.	He	was	received	by	kings	and queens.	He	lived	a	life	as	perfect	as	money	and	power	could	make	it.	It	was crazy	to	risk	all	this	because	of	a	whim.	Maybe	he	could	get	to	Corleone.	What was	the	legal	penalty	for	killing	a	racehorse?	He	laughed	wildly	and	his	doctor and	servants	watched	him	with	nervous	anxiety.	Another	thought	occurred	to him.	He	would	be	the	laughingstock	of	California	merely	because	someone	had contemptuously	defied	his	power	in	such	arrogant	fashion.	That	decided	him. That	and	the	thought	that	maybe,	maybe	they	wouldn’t	kill	him.	That	they	had something	much	more	clever	and	painful	in	reserve.
																Woltz	gave	the	necessary	orders.	His	personal	confidential	staff	swung into	action.	The	servants	and	the	doctor	were	sworn	to	secrecy	on	pain	of incurring	the	studio’s	and	Woltz’s	undying	enmity.	Word	was	given	to	the	press that	the	racehorse	Khartoum	had	died	of	an	illness	contracted	during	his shipment	from	England.	Orders	were	given	to	bury	the	remains	in	a	secret	place on	the	estate.
																Six	hours	later	Johnny	Fontane	received	a	phone	call	from	the executive	producer	of	the	film	telling	him	to	report	for	work	the	following Monday.
	
																That	evening,	Hagen	went	to	the	Don’s	house	to	prepare	him	for	the important	meeting	the	next	day	with	Virgil	Sollozzo.	The	Don	had	summoned his	eldest	son	to	attend,	and	Sonny	Corleone,	his	heavy	Cupid-shaped	face drawn	with	fatigue,	was	sipping	at	a	glass	of	water.	He	must	still	be	humping that	maid	of	honor,	Hagen	thought.	Another	worry.
																Don	Corleone	settled	into	an	armchair	puffing	his	Di	Nobili	cigar. Hagen	kept	a	box	of	them	in	his	room.	He	had	tried	to	get	the	Don	to	switch	to Havanas	but	the	Don	claimed	they	hurt	his	throat.
																“Do	we	know	everything	necessary	for	us	to	know?”	the	Don	asked.
																Hagen	opened	the	folder	that	held	his	notes.	The	notes	were	in	no	way incriminating,	merely	cryptic	reminders	to	make	sure	he	touched	on	every important	detail.	“Sollozzo	is	coming	to	us	for	help,”	Hagen	said.	“He	will	ask the	family	to	put	up	at	least	a	million	dollars	and	to	promise	some	sort	of immunity	from	the	law.	For	that	we	get	a	piece	of	the	action,	nobody	knows	how much.	Sollozzo	is	vouched	for	by	the	Tattaglia	family	and	they	may	have	a	piece of	the	action.	The	action	is	narcotics.	Sollozzo	has	the	contacts	in	Turkey,	where they	grow	the	poppy.	From	there	he	ships	to	Sicily.	No	trouble.	In	Sicily	he	has the	plant	to	process	into	heroin.	He	has	safety-valve	operations	to	bring	it	down to	morphine	and	bring	it	up	to	heroin	if	necessary.	But	it	would	seem	that	the processing	plant	in	Sicily	is	protected	in	every	way.	The	only	hitch	is	bringing	it into	this	country,	and	then	distribution.	Also	initial	capital.	A	million	dollars cash	doesn’t	grow	on	trees.”	Hagen	saw	Don	Corleone	grimace.	The	old	man hated	unnecessary	flourishes	in	business	matters.	He	went	on	hastily.
																“They	call	Sollozzo	the	Turk.	Two	reasons.	He’s	spent	a	lot	of	time	in Turkey	and	is	supposed	to	have	a	Turkish	wife	and	kids.	Second.	He’s	supposed to	be	very	quick	with	the	knife,	of	was,	when	he	was	young.	Only	in	matters	of business,	though,	and	with	some	sort	of	reasonable	complaint.	A	very	competent man	and	his	own	boss.	He	has	a	record,	he’s	done	two	terms	in	prison,	one	in Italy,	one	in	the	United	States,	and	he’s	known	to	the	authorities	as	a	narcotics man.	This	could	be	a	plus	for	us.	It	means	that	he’ll	neveblqut	immunity	to testify,	since	he’s	considered	the	top	and,	of	course,	because	of	his	record.	Also he	has	an	American	wife	and	three	children	and	he	is	a	good	family	man.	He’ll
stand	still	for	any	rap	as	long	as	he	knows	that	they	will	be	well	taken	care	of	for living	money.”
																The	Don	puffed	on	his	cigar	and	said,	“Santino,	what	do	you	think?”
																Hagen	knew	what	Sonny	would	say.	Sonny	was	chafing	at	being	under the	Don’s	thumb.	He	wanted	a	big	operation	of	his	own.	Something	like	this would	be	perfect.
																Sonny	took	a	long	slug	of	scotch.	“There’s	a	lot	of	money	in	that	white powder,”	he	said.	“But	it	could	be	dangerous.	Some	people	could	wind	up	in	jail for	twenty	years.	I’d	say	that	if	we	kept	out	of	the	operations	end,	just	stuck	to protection	and	financing,	it	might	be	a	good	idea.”
																Hagen	looked	at	Sonny	approvingly.	He	had	played	his	cards	well.	He had	stuck	to	the	obvious,	much	the	best	course	for	him.
																The	Don	puffed	on	his	cigar.	“And	you,	Tom,	what	do	you	think?”
																Hagen	composed	himself	to	be	absolutely	honest.	He	had	already come	to	the	conclusion	that	the	Don	would	refuse	Sollozzo’s	proposition.	But what	was	worse,	Hagen	was	convinced	that	for	one	of	the	few	times	in	his experience,	the	Don	had	not	thought	things	through.	He	was	not	looking	far enough	ahead.
																“Go	ahead,	Tom,”	the	Don	said	encouragingly.	“Not	even	a	Sicilian Consigliere	always	agrees	with	the	boss.”	They	all	laughed.
																“I	think	you	should	say	yes,”	Hagen	said.	“You	know	all	the	obvious reasons.	But	the	most	important	one	is	this.	There	is	more	money	potential	in narcotics	than	in	any	other	business.	If	we	don’t	get	into	it,	somebody	else	will, maybe	the	Tattaglia	family.	With	the	revenue	they	earn	they	can	amass	more	and more	police	and	political	power.	Their	family	will	become	stronger	than	ours. Eventually	they	will	come	after	us	to	take	away	what	we	have.	It’s	just	like countries.	If	they	arm,	we	have	to	arm.	If	they	become	stronger	economically, they	become	a	threat	to	us.	Now	we	have	the	gambling	and	we	have	the	unions
and	right	now	they	are	the	best	things	to	have.	But	I	think	narcotics	is	the coming	thing.	I	think	we	have	to	have	a	piece	of	that	action	or	we	risk everything	we	have.	Not	now,	but	maybe	ten	years	from	now.”
																The	Don	seemed	enormously	impressed.	He	puffed	on	his	cigar	and murmured,	“That’s	the	most	important	thing	of	course.”	He	sighed	and	got	to	his feet.	“What	time	do	I	have	to	meet	this	infidel	tomorrow?”
																Hagen	said	hopefully,	“He’ll	be	here	at	ten	in	the	morning.”	Maybe	the Don	would	go	for	it.
																“I’ll	want	you	both	here	with	me,”	the	Don	said.	He	rose,	stretching, and	took	his	son	by	the	arm.	“Santino,	get	some	sleep	tonight,	you	look	like	the devil	himself.	Take	care	of	yourself,	you	won’t	be	young	forever.”
																Sonny,	encouraged	by	this	sign	of	fatherly	concern,	asked	the	question Hagen	did	not	dare	to	ask.	“Pop,	what’s	your	answer	going	to	be?”
																Don	Corleone	smiled.	“How	do	I	know	until	I	hear	the	percentages and	other	details?	Besides	I	have	to	have	time	to	think	over	the	advice	given	here tonight.	After	all,	I’m	not	a	man	who	does	things	rashly.”	As	he	went	out	the door	he	said	casually	to	Hagen,	“Do	you	have	in	your	notes	that	the	Turk	made his	living	from	prostitution	before	the	war?	As	the	Tattaglia	family	does	now. Write	that	down	before	you	forget.”	There	was	just	a	touch	of	derision	in	the Don’s	voice	and	Hagen	flushed.	He	had	deliberately	not	mentioned	it, legitimately	so	since	it	really	had	no	bearing,	but	he	had	feared	it	might prejudice	the	Don’s	decision.	He	was	notoriously	straitlaced	in	matters	of	sex.
	
																Virgil	“the	Turk”	Sollozzo	was	a	powerfully	built,	medium-sized	man of	dark	complexion	who	could	have	been	taken	for	a	true	Turk.	He	had	a scimitar	of	a	nose	and	cruel	black	eyes.	He	also	had	an	impressive	dignity.
																Sonny	Corleone	met	him	at	the	door	and	brought	him	into	the	office where	Hagen	and	the	Don	waited.	Hagen	thought	he	had	never	seen	a	more
dangerous-looking	man	except	for	Luca	Brasi.
																There	were	polite	handshakings	all	around.	If	the	Don	ever	asks	me	if this	man	has	balls,	I	would	have	to	answer	yes,	Hagen	thought.	He	had	never seen	such	force	in	one	man,	not	even	the	Don.	In	fact	the	Don	appeared	at	his worst.	He	was	being	a	little	too	simple,	a	little	too	peasantlike	in	his	greeting.
																Sollozzo	came	to	the	point	immediately.	The	business	was	narcotics. Everything	was	set	up.	Certain	poppy	fields	in	Turkey	had	pledged	him	certain amounts	every	year.	He	had	a	protected	plant	in	France	to	convert	into morphine.	He	had	an	absolutely	secure	plant	in	Sicily	to	process	into	heroin. Smuggling	into	both	countries	was	as	positively	safe	as	such	matters	could	be. Entry	into	the	United	States	would	entail	about	five	percent	losses	since	the	FBI itself	was	incorruptible,	as	they	both	knew.	But	the	profits	would	be	enormous, the	risk	nonexistent.
																“Then	why	do	you	come	to	me?”	the	Don	asked	politely.	“How	have	I deserved	your	generosity?”
																Sollozzo’s	dark	face	remained	impassive.	“I	need	two	million	dollars cash,”	he	said.	“Equally	important,	I	need	a	man	who	has	powerful	friends	in	the important	places.	Some	of	my	couriers	will	be	caught	over	the	years.	That	is inevitable.	They	will	all	have	clean	records,	that	I	promise.	So	it	will	be	logical for	judges	to	give	light	sentences.	I	need	a	friend	who	can	guarantee	that	when my	people	get	in	trouble	they	won’t	spend	more	than	a	year	or	two	in	jail.	Then they	won’t	talk.	But	if	they	get	ten	and	twenty	years,	who	knows?	In	this	world there	are	many	weak	individuals.	They	may	talk,	they	may	jeopardize	more important	people.	Legal	protection	is	a	must.	I	hear,	Don	Corleone,	that	you have	as	many	judges	in	your	pocket	as	a	bootblack	has	pieces	of	silver.”
																Don	Corleone	didn’t	bother	to	acknowledge	the	compliment.	“What percentage	for	my	family?”	he	asked.
																Sollozzo’s	eyes	gleamed.	“Fifty	percent.”	He	paused	and	then	said	in	a voice	that	was	almost	a	caress,	“In	the	first	year	your	share	would	be	three	or four	million	dollars.	Then	it	would	go	up.”
																Don	Corleone	said,	“	And	what	is	the	percentage	of	the	Tattaglia family?”
																For	the	first	time	Sollozzo	seemed	to	be	nervous.	“They	will	receive something	from	my	share.	I	need	some	help	in	the	operations.”
																“So,”	Don	Corleone	said,	“I	receive	fifty	percent	merely	for	finance and	legal	protection.	I	have	no	worries	about	operations,	is	that	what	you	tell me?”
																Sollozzo	nodded.	“If	you	think	two	million	dollars	in	cash	is	‘merely finance,’	I	congratulate	you,	Don	Corleone.”
																The	Don	said	quietly,	“I	consented	to	see	you	out	of	my	respect	for	the Tattaglias	and	because	I’ve	heard	you	are	a	serious	man	to	be	treated	also	with respect.	I	must	say	no	to	you	but	I	must	give	you	my	reasons.	The	profits	in	your business	are	huge	but	so	are	the	risks.	Your	operation,	if	I	were	part	of	it,	could damage	my	other	interests.	It’s	true	I	have	many,	many	friends	in	politics,	but they	would	not	be	so	friendly	if	my	business	were	narcotics	instead	of	gambling. They	think	gambling	is	something	like	liquor,	a	harmless	vice,	and	they	think narcotics	a	dirty	business.	No,	don’t	protest.	I’m	telling	you	their	thoughts,	not mine.	How	a	man	makes	his	living	is	not	my	concern.	And	what	I	am	telling	you is	that	this	business	of	yours	is	too	risky.	All	the	members	of	my	family	have lived	well	the	last	ten	years,	without	danger,	without	harm.	I	can’t	endanger them	or	their	livelihoods	out	of	greed.”
																The	only	sign	of	Sollozzo’s	disappointment	was	a	quick	flickering	of his	eyes	around	the	room,	as	if	he	hoped	Hagen	or	Sonny	would	speak	in	his support.	Then	he	said,	“	Are	you	worried	about	security	for	your	two	million?”
																The	Don	smiled	coldly.	“No,”	he	said.
																Sollozzo	tried	again.	“The	Tattaglia	family	will	guarantee	your investment	also.”
																It	was	then	that	Sonny	Corleone	made	an	unforgivable	error	in