did	not	inform	to	the	police	a	warm	welcome	would	be	his	when	he	left	prison. There	would	be	a	party	waiting	in	his	home,	the	best	of	food,	homemade	ravioli, wine,	pastries,	with	all	his	friends	and	relatives	gathered	to	rejoice	in	his freedom.	And	sometime	during	the	night	the	Consigliere,	Genco	Abbandando, or	perhaps	even	the	Don	himself,	would	drop	by	to	pay	his	respects	to	such	a stalwart,	take	a	glass	of	wine	in	his	honor,	and	leave	a	handsome	present	of money	so	that	he	could	enjoy	a	week	or	two	of	leisure	with	his	family	before returning	to	his	daily	toil.	Such	was	the	infinite	sympathy	and	understanding	of Don	Corleone.
																It	was	at	this	time	that	the	Don	got	the	idea	that	he	ran	his	world	far better	than	his	enemies	ran	the	greater	world	which	continually	obstructed	his path.	And	this	feeling	was	nurtured	by	the	poor	people	of	the	neighborhood	who constantly	came	to	him	for	help.	To	get	on	the	home	relief,	to	get	a	young	boy	a job	or	out	of	jail,	to	borrow	a	small	sum	of	money	desperately	needed,	to intervene	with	landlords	who	against	all	reason	demanded	rent	from	jobless tenants.
																Don	Vito	Corleone	helped	them	all.	Not	only	that,	he	helped	them	with goodwill,	with	encouraging	words	to	take	the	bitter	sting	out	of	the	charity	he gave	them.	It	was	only	natural	then	that	when	these	Italians	were	puzzled	and confused	on	who	to	vote	for	to	represent	them	in	the	state	legislature,	in	the	city offices,	in	the	Congress,	they	should	ask	the	advice	of	their	friend	Don	Corleone, their	Godfather.	And	so	he	became	a	political	power	to	be	consulted	by	practical party	chiefs.	He	consolidated	this	power	with	a	far-seeing	statesmanlike intelligence;	by	helping	brilliant	boys	from	poor	Italian	families	through	college, boys	who	would	later	become	lawyers,	assistant	district	attorneys,	and	even judges.	He	planned	for	the	future	of	his	empire	with	all	the	foresight	of	a	great national	leader.
																The	repeal	of	Prohibition	dealt	this	empire	a	crippling	blow	but	again he	had	taken	his	precautions.	In	1933	he	sent	emissaries	to	the	man	who controlled	all	the	gambling.	activities	of	Manhattan,	the	crap	games	on	the docks,	the	shylocking	that	went	with	it	as	hot	dogs	go	with	baseball	games,	the bookmaking	on	sports	and	horses,	the	illicit	gambling	houses	that	ran	poker games,	the	policy	or	numbers	racket	of	Harlem.	This	man’s	name	was	Salvatore
Maranzano	and	he	was	one	of	the	acknowledged	pezzonovante,	.90	calibers,	or big	shots	of	the	New	York	underworld.	The	Corleone	emissaries	proposed	to Maranzano	an	equal	partnership	beneficial	to	both	parties.	Vito	Corleone	with his	organization,	his	police	and	political	contacts,	could	give	the	Maranzano operations	a	stout	umbrella	and	the	new	strength	to	expand	into	Brooklyn	and the	Bronx.	But	Maranzano	was”	a	short-sighted	man	and	spurned	the	Corleone offer	with	contempt.	The	great	AI	Capone	was	Maranzano’s	friend	and	he	had his	own	organization,	his	own	men,	plus	a	huge	war	chest.	He	would	not	brook this	upstart	whose	reputation	was	more	that	of	a	Parliamentary	debater	than	a true	Mafioso.	Maranzano’s	refusal	touched	off	the	great	war	of	1933	which	was to	change	the	whole	structure	of	the	underworld	in	New	York	City.
																At	first	glance	it	seemed	an	uneven	match.	Salvatore	Maranzano	had	a powerful	organization	with	strong	enforcers.	He	had	a	friendship	with	Capone	in Chicago	and	could	call	on	help	in	that	quarter.	He	also	had	a	good	relationship with	the	Tattaglia	Family,	which	controlled	prostitution	in	the	city	and	what there	was	of	the	thin	drug	traffic	at	that	time.	He	also	had	political	contacts	with powerful	business	leaders	who	used	his	enforcers	to	terrorize	the	Jewish unionists	in	the	garment	center	and	the	Italian	anarchist	syndicates	in	the building	trades.
																Against	this,	Don	Corleone	could	throw	two	small	but	superbly organized	regimes	led	by	Clemenza	and	Tessio.	His	political	and	police	contacts were	negated	by	the	business	leaders	who	would	support	Maranzano.	But	in	his favor	was	the	enemy’s	lack	of	intelligence	about	his	organization.	The underworld	did	not	know	the	true	strength	of	his	soldiers	and	even	were deceived	that	Tessio	in	Brooklyn	was	a	separate	and	independent	operation.
																And	yet	despite	all	this,	it	was	an	unequal	battle	until	Vito	Corleone evened	out	the	odds	with	one	master	stroke.
																Maranzano	sent	a	call	to	Capone	for	his	two	best	gunmen	to	come	to New	York	to	eliminate	the	upstart.	The	Corleone	Family	had	friends	and intelligence	in	Chicago	who	relayed	the	news	that	the	two	gunmen	were	arriving by	train.	Vito	Corleone	dispatched	Luca	Brasi	to	take	care	of	them	with instructions	that	would	liberate	the	strange	man’s	most	savage	instincts.
																Brasi	and	his	people,	four	of	them,	received	the	Chicago	hoods	at	the railroad	station.	One	of	Brasi’s	men	procured	and	drove	a	taxicab	for	the	purpose and	the	station	porter	carrying	the	bags	led	the	Capone	men	to	this	cab.	When they	got	in,	Brasi	and	another	of	his	men	crowded	in	after	them,	guns	ready,	and made	the	two	Chicago	boys	lie	on	the	floor.	The	cab	drove	to	a	warehouse	near the	docks	that	Brasi	had	prepared	for	them.
																The	two	Capone	men	were	bound	hand	and	foot	and	small	bath	towels were	stuffed	into	their	mouths	to	keep	them	from	crying	out.
																Then	Brasi	took	an	ax	from	its	place	against	the	wall	and	started hacking	at	one	of	the	Capone	men.	He	chopped	the	man’s	feet	off,	then	the	legs at	the	knees,	then	the	thighs	where	they	joined	the	torso.	Brasi	was	an	extremely powerful	man	but	it	took	him	many	swings	to	accomplish	his	purpose.	By	that time	of	course	the	victim	had	given	up	the	ghost	and	the	floor	of	the	warehouse was	slippery	with	the	hacked	fragments	of	his	flesh	and	the	gouting	of	his	blood. When	Brasi	turned	to	his	second	victim	he	found	further	effort	unnecessary.	The second	Capone	gunman	out	of	sheer	terror	had,	impossibly,	swallowed	the	bath towel	in	his	mouth	and	suffocated.	The	bath	towel	was	found	in	the	man’s stomach	when	the	police	performed	their	autopsy	to	determine	the	cause	of death.
																A	few	days	later	in	Chicago	the	Capones	received	a	message	from Vito	Corleone.	It	was	to	this	effect:	“You	know	now	how	I	deal	with	enemies. Why	does	a	Neapolitan	interfere	in	a	quarrel	between	two	Sicilians?	If	you	wish me	to	consider	you	as	a	friend	I	owe	you	a	service	which	I	will	pay	on	demand. A	man	like	yourself	must	know	how	much	more	profitable	it	is	to	have	a	friend who,	instead	of	calling	on	you	for	help,	takes	care	of	his	own	affairs	and	stands ever	ready	to	help	you	in	some	future	time	of	trouble.	If	you	do	not	wish	my friendship”	so	be	it.	But	then	I	must	tell	you	that	the	climate	in	this	city	is	damp; unhealthy	for	Neapolitans,	and	you	are	advised	never	to	visit	it.”
																The	arrogance	of	this	letter	was	a	calculated	one.	The	Don	held	the Capones	in	small	esteem	as	stupid,	obvious	cutthroats.	His	intelligence	informed him	that	Capone	had	forfeited	all	political	influence	because	of	his	public arrogance	and	the	flaunting	of	his	criminal	wealth.	The	Don	knew,	in	fact	was
positive,	that	without	political	influence,	without	the	camouflage	of	society, Capone’s	world,	and	others	like	it,	could	be	easily	destroyed.	He	knew	Capone was	on	the	path	to	destruction.	He	also	knew	that	Capone’s	influence	did	not extend	beyond	the	boundaries	of	Chicago,	terrible	and	all-pervading	as	that influence	there	might	be.
																The	tactic	was	successful.	Not	so	much	because	of	its	ferocity	but because	of	the	chilling	swiftness,	the	quickness	of	the	Don’s	reaction.	If	his intelligence	was	so	good,	any	further	moves	would	be	fraught	with	danger.	It was	better,	far	wiser,	to	accept	the	offer	of	friendship	with	its	implied	payoff. The	Capones	sent	back	word	that	they	would	not	interfere.
																The	odds	were	now	equal.	And	Vito	Corleone	had	earned	an	enormous amount	of	“respect”	throughout	the	United	States	underworld	with	his humiliation	of	the	Capones.	For	six	months	he	out-generaled	Maranzano.	He raided	the	crap	games	under	that	man’s	protection,	located	his	biggest	policy banker	in	Harlem	and	had	him	relieved	of	a	day’s	play	not	only	in	money	but	in records.	He	engaged	his	enemies	on	all	fronts.	Even	in	the	garment	centers	he sent	Clemenza	and	his	men	to	fight	on	the	side	of	the	unionists	against	the enforcers	on	the	payroll	of	Maranzano	and	the	owners	of	the	dress	firms.	And	on all	fronts	his	superior	intelligence	and	organization	made	him	the	victor. Clemenza’s	jolly	ferocity,	which	Corleone	employed	judiciously,	also	helped turn	the	tide	of	battle.	And	then	Don	Corleone	sent	the	held-back	reserve	of	the Tessio	regime	after	Maranzano	himself.
																By	this	time	Maranzano	had	dispatched	emissaries	suing	for	a	peace. Vito	Corleone	refused	to	see	them,	put	them	off	on	one	pretext	or	another.	The Maranzano	soldiers	were	deserting	their	leader,	not	wishing	to	die	in	a	losing cause.	Bookmakers	and	shylocks	were	paying	the	Corleone	organization	their protection	money.	The	war	was	all	but	over.
																And	then	finally	on	New	year’s	Eve	of	1933.	Tessio	got	inside	the defenses	of	Maranzano	himself.	The	Maranzano	lieutenants	were	anxious	for	a deal	and	agreed	to	lead	their	chief	to	the	slaughter.	They	told	him	that	a	meeting had	been	arranged	in	a	Brooklyn	restaurant	with	Corleone	and	they	accompanied Maranzano	as	his	bodyguards.	They	left	him	sitting	at	a	checkered	table,
morosely	munching	a	piece	of	bread,	and	fled	the	restaurant	as	Tessio	and	four of	his	men	entered.	The	execution	was	swift	and	sure.	Maranzano,	his	mouth	full of	half-chewed	bread,	was	riddled	with	bullets.	The	war	was	over.
																The	Maranzano	empire	was	incorporated	into	the	Corleone	operation. Don	Corleone	set	up	a	system	of	tribute,	allowing	all	incumbents	to	remain	in their	bookmaking	and	policy	number	spots.	As	a	bonus	he	had	a	foothold	in	the unions	of	the	garment	center	which	in	later	years	was	to	prove	extremely important.	And	now	that	he	had	settled	his	business	affairs	the	Don	found trouble	at	home.
																Santino	Corleone,	Sonny,	was	sixteen	years	old	and	grown	to	an astonishing	six	feet	with	broad	shoulders	and	a	heavy	face	that	was	sensual	but by	no	means	effeminate.	But	where	Fredo	was	a	quiet	boy,	and	Michael,	of course,	a	toddler,	Santino	was	constantly	in	trouble.	He	got	into	fights,	did	badly in	school	and,	finally,	Clemenza,	who	was	the	boy’s	godfather	and	had	a	duty	to speak,	came	to	Don	Corleone	one	evening	and	informed	him	that	his	son	had taken	part	in	an	armed	robbery,	a	stupid	affair	which	could	have	gone	very badly.	Sonny	was	obviously	the	ringleader,	the	two	other	boys	in	the	robbery	his followers.
																It	was	one	of	the	very	few	times	that	Vito	Corleone	lost	his	temper. Tom	Hagen	had	been	living	in	his	home	for	three	years	and	he	asked	Clemenza if	the	orphan	boy	had	been	involved.	Clemenza	shook	his	head.	Don	Corleone had	a	car	sent	to	bring	Santino	to	his	offices	in	the	Genco	Pura	Olive	Oil Company.
																For	the	first	time,	the	Don	met	defeat.	Alone	with	his	son,	he	gave	full vent	to	his	rage,	cursing	the	hulking	Sonny	in	Sicilian	dialect,	a	language	so much	more	satisfying	than	any	other	for	expressing	rage.	He	ended	up	with	a question.	“What	gave	you	the	right	to	commit	such	an	act?	What	made	you	wish to	commit	such	an	act?”
																Sonny	stood	there,	angry,	refusing	to	answer.	The	Don	said	with contempt,	“	And	so	stupid.	What	did	you	earn	for	that	night’s	work?	Fifty	dollars each?	Twenty	dollars?	You	risked	your	life	for	twenty	dollars,	eh?”
																As	if	he	had	not	heard	these	last	words,	Sonny	said	defiantly,	“I	saw you	kill	Fanucci.”
																The	Don	said,	“Ahhh”	and	sank	back	in	his	chair.	He	waited.
																Sonny	said,	“When	Fanucci	left--the	building,	Mama	said	I	could	go up	the	house.	I	saw	you	go	up	the	roof	and	I	followed	you.	I	saw	everything	you did.	I	stayed	up	there	and	I	saw	you	throwaway	the	wallet	and	the	gun.”
																The	Don	sighed.	“Well,	then	I	can’t	talk	to	you	about	how	you	should behave.	Don’t	you	want	to	finish	school,	don’t	you	want	to	be	a	lawyer? Lawyers	can	steal	more	money	with	a	briefcase	than	a	thousand	men	with	guns and	masks.”
																Sonny	grinned	at	him	and	said	slyly,	“I	want	to	enter	the	family business.”	When	he	saw	that	the	Don’s	face	remained	impassive,	that	he	did	not laugh	at	the	joke,	he	added	hastily,	“I	can	learn	how	to	sell	olive	oil.”
																Still	the	Don	did	not	answer.	Finally	he	shrugged.	“Every	man	has	one destiny,”	he	said.	He	did	not	add	that	the	witnessing	of	Fanucci’s	murder	had decided	that	of	his	son.	He	merely	turned	away	and	added	quietly,	“Come	in tomorrow	morning	at	nine	o’clock.	Genco	will	show	you	what	to	do.”
																But	Genco	Abbandando,	with	that	shrewd	insight	that	a	Consigliere must	have,	realized	the	true	wish	of	the	Don	and	used	Sonny	mostly	as	a bodyguard	for	his	father,	a	position	in	which	he	could	also	learn	the	subtleties	of being	a	Don.	And	it	brought	out	a	professorial	instinct	in	the	Don	himself,	who often	gave	lectures	on	how	to	succeed	for	the	benefit	of	his	eldest	son.
																Besides	his	oft-repeated	theory	that	a	man	has	but	one	destiny,	the	Don constantly	reproved	Sonny	for	that	young	man’s	outbursts	of	temper.	The	Don considered	a	use	of	threats	the	most	foolish	kind	of	exposure;	the	unleashing	of anger	without	forethought	as	the	most	dangerous	indulgence.	No	one	had	ever heard	the	Don	utter	a	naked	threat,	no	one	had	ever	seen	him	in	an uncontrollable	rage.	It	was	unthinkable.	And	so	he	tried	to	teach	Sonny	his	own disciplines.	He	claimed	that	there	was	no	greater	natural	advantage	in	life	than
having	an	enemy	overestimate	your	faults,	unless	it	was	to	have	a	friend underestimate	your	virtues.
																The	caporegime,	Clemenza,	took	Sonny	in	hand	and	taught	him	how to	shoot	and	to	wield	a	garrot.	Sonny	had	no	taste	for	the	Italian	rope,	he	was	too Americanized.	He	preferred	the	simple,	direct,	impersonal	Anglo-Saxon	gun, which	saddened	Clemenza.	But	Sonny	became	a	constant	and	welcome companion	to	his	father,	driving	his	car,	helping	him	in	little	details.	For	the	next two	years	he	seemed	like	the	usual	son	entering	his	father’s	business,	not	too bright,	not	too	eager,	content	to	hold	down	a	soft	job.
																Meanwhile	his	boyhood	chum	and	semiadopted	brother	Tom	Hagen was	going	to	college.	Fredo	was	still	in	high	school;	Michael,	the	youngest brother,	was	in	grammar	school,	and	baby	sister	Connie	was	a	toddling	girl	of four.	The	family	had	long	since	moved	to	an	apartment	house	in	the	Bronx.	Don Corleone	was	considering	buying	a	house	in	Long	Island,	but	he	wanted	to	fit this	in	with	other	plans	he	was	formulating.
																Vito	Corleone	was	a	man	with	vision.	All	the	great	cities	of	America were	being	torn	by	underworld	strife.	Guerrilla	wars	by	the	dozen	flared	up, ambitious	hoodlums	trying	to	carve	themselves	a	bit	of	empire;	men	like Corleone	himself	were	trying	to	keep	their	borders	and	rackets	secure.	Don Corleone	saw	that	the	newspapers	and	government	agencies	were	using	these killings	to	get	stricter	and	stricter	laws,	to	use	harsher	police	methods.	He foresaw	that	public	indignation	might	even	lead	to	a	suspension	of	democratic procedures	which	could	be	fatal	to	him	and	his	people.	His	own	empire, internally,	was	secure.	He	decided	to	bring	peace	to	all	the	warring	factions	in New	York	City	and	then	in	the	nation.
																He	had	no	illusions	about	the	dangerousness	of	his	mission.	He	spent the	first	year	meeting	with	different	chiefs	of	gangs	in	New	York,	laying	the groundwork,	sounding	them	out,	proposing	spheres	of	influence	that	would	be honored	by	a	loosely	bound	confederated	council.	But	there	were	too	many factions,	too	many	special	interests	that	conflicted.	Agreement	was	impossible. Like	other	great	rulers	and	lawgivers	in	history	Don	Corleone	decided	that	order and	peace	were	impossible	until	the	number	of	reigning	states	had	been	reduced
to	a	manageable	number.
																There	were	five	or	six	“Families”	too	powerful	to	eliminate.	But	the rest,	the	neighborhood	Black	Hand	terrorists,	the	free-lance	shylocks,	the	strongarm	bookmakers	operating	without	the	proper,	that	is	to	say	paid,	protection	of the	legal	authorities,	would	have	to	go.	And	so	he	mounted	what	was	in	effect	a colonial	war	against	these	people	and	threw	all	the	resources	of	the	Corleone organization	against	them.
																The	pacification	of	the	New	York	area	took	three	years	and	had	some unexpected	rewards.	At	first	it	took	the	form	of	bad	luck.	A	group	of	mad-dog Irish	stickup	artists	the	Don	had	marked	for	extermination	almost	carried	the	day with	sheer	Emerald	Isle	élan.	By	chance,	and	with	suicidal	bravery,	one	of	these Irish	gunmen	pierced	the	Don’s	protective	cordon	and	put	a	shot	into	his	chest. The	assassin	was	immediately	riddled	with	bullets	but	the	damage	was	done.
																However	this	gave	Santino	Corleone	his	chance.	With	his	father	out	of action,	Sonny	took	command	of	a	troop,	his	own	regime,	with	the	rank	of caporegime,	and	like	a	young,	untrumpeted	Napoleon,	showed	a	genius	for	city warfare.	He	also	showed	a	merciless	ruthlessness,	the	lack	of	which	had	been Don	Corleone’s	only	fault	as	a	conqueror.
																From	1935	to	1937	Sonny	Corleone	made	a	reputation	as	the	most cunning	and	relentless	executioner	the	underworld	had	yet	known.	Yet	for	sheer terror	even	he	was	eclipsed	by	the	awesome	man	named	Luca	Brasi.
																It	was	Brasi	who	went	after	the	rest	of	the	Irish	gunmen	and	singlehandedly	wiped	them	out.	It	was	Brasi,	operating	alone	when	one	of	the	six powerful	families	tried	to	interfere	and	become	the	protector	of	the independents,	who	assassinated	the	head	of	the	family	as	a	warning.	Shortly after,	the	Don	recovered	from	his	wound	and	made	peace	with	that	particular family.
																By	1937	peace	and	harmony	reigned	in	New	York	City	except	for minor	incidents,	minor	misunderstandings	which	were,	of	course,	sometimes fatal.
																As	the	rulers	of	ancient	cities	always	kept	an	anxious	eye	on	the barbarian	tribes	roving	around	their	walls,	so	Don	Corleone	kept	an	eye	on	the affairs	of	the	world	outside	his	world.	He	noted	the	coming	of	Hitler,	the	fall	of Spain,	Germany’s	strong-arming	of	Britain	at	Munich.	Unblinkered	by	that outside	world,	he	saw	clearly	the	coming	global	war	and	he	understood	the implications.	His	own	world	would	be	more	impregnable	than	before.	Not	only that,	fortunes	could	be	made	in	time	of	war	by	alert,	foresighted	folk.	But	to	do so	peace	must	reign	in	his	domain	while	war	raged	in	the	world	outside.
																Don	Corleone	carried	his	message	through	the	United	States.	He conferred	with	compatriots	in	Los	Angeles,	San	Francisco,	Cleveland,	Chicago, Philadelphia,	Miami,	and	Boston.	He	was	the	underworld	apostle	of	peace	and, by	1939,	more	successful	than	any	Pope,	he	had	achieved	a	working	agreement amongst	the	most	powerful	underworld	organizations	in	the	country.	Like	the Constitution	of	the	United	States	this	agreement	respected	fully	the	internal authority	of	each	member	in	his	state	or	city.	The	agreement	covered	only spheres	of.	influence	and	an	agreement	to	enforce	peace	in	the	underworld.
																And	so	when	World	War	II	broke	out	in	1939,	when	the	United	States joined	the	conflict	in	1941,	the	world	of	Don	Vito	Corleone	was	at	peace,	in order,	fully	prepared	to	reap	the	golden	harvest	on	equal	terms	with	all	the	other industries	of	a	booming	America.	The	Corleone	Family	had	a	hand	in	supplying black-market	OPA	food	stamps,	gasoline	stamps,	even	travel	priorities.	It	could help	get	war	contracts	and	then	help	get	black-market	materials	for	those garment	center	clothing	firms	who	were	not	given	enough	raw	material	because they	did	not	have	government	contracts.	He	could	even	get	all	the	young	men	in his	organization,	those	eligible	for	Army	draft,	excused	from	fighting	in	the foreign	war.	He	did	this	with	the	aid	of	doctors	who	advised	what	drugs	had	to be	taken	before	physical	examination,	or	by	placing	the	men	in	draft-exempt positions	in	the	war	industries.
																And	so	the	Don	could	take	pride	in	his	rule.	His	world	was	safe	for those	who	had	sworn	loyalty	to	him;	other	men	who	believed	in	law	and	order were	dying	by	the	millions.	The	only	fly	in	the	ointment	was	that	his	own	son, Michael	Corleone,	refused	to	be	helped,	insisted	on	volunteering	to	serve	his own	country.	And	to	the	Don’s	astonishment,	so	did	a	few	of	his	other	young
men	in	the	organization.	One	of	the	men,	trying	to	explain	this	to	his caporegime,	said,	“This	country	has	been	good	to	me.”	Upon	this	story	being relayed	to	the	Don	he	said	angrily	to	the	caporegime,	“I	have	been	good	to	him.” It	might	have	gone	badly	for	these	people	but,	as	he	had	excused	his	son Michael,	so	must	he	excuse	other	young	men	who	so	misunderstood	their	duty	to their	Don	and	to	themselves.
																At	the	end	of	World	War	II	Don	Corleone	knew	that	again	his	world would	have	to	change	its	ways,	that	it	would	have	to	fit	itself	more	snugly	into the	ways	of	the	other,	larger	world.	He	believed	he	could	do	this	with	no	loss	of profit.,
																There	was	reason	for	this	belief	in	his	own	experience.	What	had	put him	on	the	right	track	were	two	personal	affairs.	Early	in	his	career	the	thenyoung	Nazorine,	only	a	baker’s	helper	planning	to	get	married,	had	come	to	him for	assistance.	He	and	his	future	bride,	a	good	Italian	girl,	had	saved	their	money and	had	paid	the	enormous	sum	of	three	hundred	dollars	to	a	wholesaler	of furniture	recommended	to	them.	This	wholesaler	had	let	them	pick	out everything	they	wanted	to	furnish	their	tenement	apartment.	A	fine	sturdy bedroom	set	with	two	bureaus	and	lamps.	Also	the	living	room	set	of	heavy stuffed	sofa	and	stuffed	armchairs,	all	covered	with	rich	gold-threaded	fabric. Nazorine	and	his	fiancée	had	spent	a	happy	day	picking	out	what	they	wanted from	the	huge	warehouse	crowded	with	furniture.	The	wholesaler	took	their money,	their	three	hundred	dollars	wrung	from	the	sweat	of	their	blood,	and pocketed	it	and	promised	the	furniture	to	be	delivered	within	the	week	to	the already	rented	flat.
																The	very	next	week	however,	the	firm	had	gone	into	bankruptcy.	The great	warehouse	stocked	with	furniture	had	been	sealed	shut	and	attached	for payment	of	creditors.	The	wholesaler	had	disappeared	to	give	other	creditors time	to	unleash	their	anger	on	the	empty	air.	Nazorine,	one	of	these,	went	to	his lawyer,	who	told	him	nothing	could	be	done	until	the	case	was	settled	in	court and	all	creditors	satisfied.	This	might	take	three	years	and	Nazorine	would	be lucky	to	get	back	ten	cents	on	the	dollar.
																Vito	Corleone	listened	to	this	story	with	amused	disbelief.	It	was	not
possible	that	the	law	could	allow	such	thievery.	The	wholesaler	owned	his	own palatial	home,	an	estate	in	Long	Island,	a	luxurious	automobile,	and	was	sending his	children	to	college.	How	could	he	keep	the	three	hundred	dollars	of	the	poor baker	Nazorine	and	not	give	him	the	furniture	he	had	paid	for?	But,	to	make sure,	Vito	Corleone	had	Genco	Abbandando	check	it	out	with	the	lawyers	who represented	the	Genco	Pura	company.
																They	verified	the	story	of	Nazorine.	The	wholesaler	had	all	his personal	wealth	in	his	wife’s	name.	His	furniture	business	was	incorporated	and he	was	not	personally	liable.	True,	he	had	shown	bad	faith	by	taking	the	money of	Nazorine	when	he	knew	he	was	going	to	file	bankruptcy	but	this	was	a common	practice.	Under	law	there	was	nothing	to	be	done.
																Of	course	the	matter	was	easily	adjusted.	Don	Corleone	sent	his Consigliere,	Genco	Abbandando,	to	speak	to	the	wholesaler,	and	as	was	to	be expected,	that	wide-awake	businessman	caught	the	drift	immediately	and arranged	for	Nazorine	to	get	his	furniture.	But	it	was	an	interesting	lesson	for	the young	Vito	Corleone.
																The	second	incident	had	more	far-reaching	repercussions.	In	1939, Don	Corleone	had	decided	to	move	his	family	out	of	the	city.	Like	any	other parent	he	wanted	his	children	to	go	to	better	schools	and	mix	with	better companions.	For	his	own	personal	reasons	he	wanted	the	anonymity	of	suburban life	where	his	reputation	was	not	known.	He	bought	the	mall	property	in	Long Beach,	which	at	that	time	had	only	four	newly	built	houses	but	with	plenty	of room	for	more.	Sonny	was	formally	engaged	to	Sandra	and	would	soon	marry, one	of	the	houses	would	be	for	him.	One	of	the	houses	was	for	the	Don.	Another was	for	Genco	Abbandando	and	his	family.	The	other	was	kept	vacant	at	the time.
																A	week	after	the	mall	was	occupied,	a	group	of	three	workmen	came in	all	innocence	with	their	truck.	They	claimed	to	be	furnace	inspectors	for	the town	of	Long	Beach.	One	of	the	Don’s	young	bodyguards	let	the	men	in	and	led them	to	the	furnace	in	the	basement.	The	Don,	his	wife	and	Sonny	were	in	the garden	taking	their	ease	and	enjoying	the	salty	sea	air.