“McCluskey,”	Hagen	said.	“By	the	way,	it	might	make	you	feel	better to	know	that	the	Corleone	Family	finally	got	up	on	the	scoreboard.	Bruno Tattaglia,	four	o’clock	this	morning.”
																Michael	sat	up.	“How	come?	I	thought	we	were	supposed	to	sit	tight.”
																Hagen	shrugged.”	After	what	happened	at	the	hospital	Sonny	got	hard. The	button	men	are	out	all	over	New	York	and	New	Jersey.	We	made	the	list last	night.	I’m	trying	to	hold	Sonny	in,	Mike.	Maybe	you	can	talk	to	him.	This whole	business	can	still	be	settled	without	a	major	war.”
																“I’ll	talk	to	him,”	Michael	said.	“Is	there	a	conference	this	morning?”,
																“Yeah,”	Hagen	said.	“Sollozzo	finally	got	in	touch	and	wants	to	sit down	with	us.	A	negotiator	is	arranging	the	details.	That	means	we	win. Sollozzo	knows	he’s	lost	and	he	wants	to	get	out	with	his	life.”	Hagen	paused. “Maybe	he	thought	we	were	soft,	ready	to	be	taken,	because	we	didn’t	strike back.	Now	with	one	of	the	Tattaglia	sons	dead	he	knows	we	mean	business.	He really	took	an	awful	gamble	bucking	the	Don.	By	the	way,	we	got	the confirmation	on	Luca.	They	killed	him	the	night	before	they	shot	your	father.	In Bruno’s	nightclub.	Imagine	that?”
																Michael	said,	“No	wonder	they	caught	him	off	guard.”
	
																At	the	houses	in	Long	Beach	the	entrance	to	the	mall	was	blocked	by	a long	black	car	parked	across	its	mouth.	Two	men	leaned	against	the	hood	of	the car.	The	two	houses	on	each	side,	Michael	noticed,	had	opened	windows	on	their upper	floors.	Christ,	Sonny	must	really	mean	business.
																Clemenza	parked	the	car	outside	the	mall	and	they	walked	inside	it. The	two	guards	were	Clemenza’s	men	and	he	gave	them	a	frown	of	greeting	that served	as	a	salute.	The	men	nodded	their	heads	in	acknowledgment.	There	were no	smiles,	no	greetings.	Clemenza	led	Hagen	and	Michael	Corleone	into	the house.
																The	door	was	opened	by	another	guard	before	they	rang.	He	had obviously	been	watching	from	a	window.	They	went	to	the	comer	office	and found	Sonny	and	Tessio	waiting	for	them.	Sonny	came	to	Michael,	took	his younger	brother’s	head	in	his	hands	and	said	kiddingly,	“Beautiful.	Beautiful.” Michael	knocked	his	hands	away,	and	went	to	the	desk	and	poured	himself	some scotch,	hoping	it	would	dull	the	ache	in	his	wired	jaw.
																The	five	of	them	sat	around	the	room	but	the	atmosphere	was	different from	their	earlier	meetings.	Sonny	was	gayer,	more	cheerful,	and	Michael realized	what	that	gaiety	meant.	There	were	no	longer	any	doubts	in	his	older brother’s	mind.	He	was	committed	and	nothing	would	sway	him.	The	attempt	by Sollozzo	the	night	before	was	the	final	straw.	There	could	no	longer	be	any question	of	a	truce.
																“We	got	a	call	from	the	negotiator	while	you	were	gone,”	Sonny	said to	Hagen.	“The	Turk	wants	a	meeting	now.”	Sonny	laughed.	“The	balls	on	that son	of	a	bitch,”	he	said	admiringly.”	After	he	craps	out	last	night	he	wants	a meeting	today	or	the	next	day.	Meanwhile	we’re	supposed	just	to	lay	back	and take	everything	he	dishes	out.	What	fucking	nerve.”
																Tom	asked	cautiously,	“What	did	you	answer?”
																Sonny	grinned.	“I	said	sure,	why	not?	Anytime	he	says,	I’m	in	no hurry.	I’ve	got	a	hundred	button	men	out	on	the	street	twenty-four	hours	a	day.	If Sollozzo	shows	one	hair	on	his	asshole	he’s	dead.	Let	them	take	all	the	time	they want.”
																Hagen	said,	“Was	there	a	definite	proposal?”
																“Yeah,”	Sonny	said.	“He	wants	us	to	send	Mike	to	meet	him	to	hear his	proposition.	The	negotiator	guarantees	Mike’s	safety.	Sollozzo	doesn’t	ask	us to	guarantee	his	safety,	he	knows	he	can’t	ask	that.	No	point.	So	the	meeting	will be	arranged	on	his	side.	His	people	will	pick	Mike	up	and	take	Mike	to	the meeting	place.	Mike	will	listen	to	Sollozzo	and	then	they’ll	turn	him	loose.	But the	meeting	place	is	secret.	The	promise	is	the	deal	will	be	so	good	we	can’t	turn it	down.”
																Hagen	asked,	“What	about	the	Tattaglias?	What	will	they	do	about Bruno?”
																“That’s	part	of	the	deal.	The	negotiator	says	the	Tattaglia	Family	has agreed	to	go	along	with	Sollozzo.	They’ll	forget	about	Bruno	Tattaglia.	He	pays for	what	they	did	to	my	father.	One	cancels	out	the	other.”	Sonny	laughed	again. “The	nervy	bastards.”
																Hagen	said	cautiously,	“We	should	hear	what	they	have	to	say.”
																Sonny	shook	his	head	from	side	to	side.	“No,	no,	Consigliere,	not	this time.”	His	voice	held	a	faint	trace	of	Italian	accent.	He	was	consciously	mocking his	father	just	to	kid	around.	“No	more	meetings.	No	more	discussions.	No	more Sollozzo	tricks.	When	the	negotiator	gets	in	touch	with	us	again	for	our	answer	I want	you	to	give	him	one	message.	I	want	Sollozzo.	If	not,	it’s	all-out	war.	We’ll go	to	the	mattresses	and	we’ll	put	all	the	button	men	out	on	the	street.	Business will	just	have	to	suffer.”
																“The	other	Families	won’t	stand	for	an	all-out	war,”	Hagen	said.	“It puts	too	much	heat	on	everybody.”
																Sonny	shrugged.	“They	have	a	simple	solution.	Give	me	Sollozzo.	Or fight	the	Corleone	Family.”	Sonny	paused,	then	said	roughly,	“No	more	advice on	how	to	patch	it	up,	Tom.	The	decision	is	made.	Your	job	is	to	help	me	win. Understand?”
																Hagen	bowed	his	head.	He	was	deep	in	thought	for	a	moment.	Then	he said,	“I	spoke	to	your	contact	in	the	police	station.	He	says	that	Captain McCluskey	is	definitely	on	Sollozzo’s	payroll	and	for	big	money.	Not	only	that, but	McCluskey	is	going	to	get	a	piece	of	the	drug	operation.	McCluskey	has agreed	to	be	Sollozzo’s	bodyguard.	The	Turk	doesn’t	poke	his	nose	out	of	his hole	without	McCluskey.	When	he	meets	Mike	for	the	conference,	McCluskey will	be	sitting	beside	him.	In	civilian	clothes	but	carrying	his	gun.	Now	what	you have	to	understand,	Sonny,	is	that	while	Sollozzo	is	guarded	like	this,	he’s invulnerable.	Nobody	has	ever	gunned	down	a	New	York	police	captain	and gotten	away	with	it.	The	heat	in	this	town	would	be	unbearable	what	with	the
newspapers,	the	whole	police	department,	the	churches,	everything.	That	would be	disastrous.	The	Families	would	be	after	you.	The	Corleone	Family	would become	outcasts.	Even	the	old	man’s	political	protection	would	run	for	cover.	So take	that	into	consideration.”
																Sonny	shrugged.	“McCluskey	can’t	stay	with	the	Turk	forever.	We’ll wait.”
																Tessio	and	Clemenza	were	puffing	on	their	cigars	uneasily,	not	daring to	speak,	but	sweating.	It	would	be	their	skins	that	would	go	on	the	line	if	the wrong	decision	was	made.
																Michael	spoke	for	the	first	time.	He	asked	Hagen,	“Can	the	old	man	be moved	out	of	the	hospital	onto	the	mall	here?”
																Hagen	shook	his	head.	“That’s	the	first	thing	I	asked.	Impossible.	He’s in	very	bad	shape.	He’ll	pull	through	but	he	needs	all	kinds	of	attention,	maybe some	more	surgery.	Impossible.”
																“Then	you	have	to	get	Sollozzo	right	away,”	Michael	said.	“We	can’t wait.	The	guy	is	too	dangerous.	He’ll	come	up	with	some	new	idea.	Remember, the	key	is	still	that	he	gets	rid	of	the	old	man.	He	knows	that.	OK,	he	knows	that now	it’s	very	tough	so	he’s	willing	to	take	defeat	for	his	life.	But	if	he’s	going	to get	killed	anyway,	he’ll	have	another	crack	at	the	Don.	And	with	that	police captain	helping	him	who	knows	what	the	hell	might	happen.	We	can’t	take	that chance.	We	have	to	get	Sollozzo	right	away.”
																Sonny	was	scratching	his	chin	thoughtfully.	“You’re	right,	kid,”	he said.	“You	got	right	to	the	old	nuts.	We	can’t	let	Sollozzo	get	another	crack	at the	old	man.”
																Hagen	said	quietly,	“What	about	Captain	McCluskey?”
																Sonny	turned	to	Michael	with	an	odd	little	smile.	“Yeah,	kid,	what about	that	tough	police	captain?”
																Michael	said	slowly,	“OK,	it’s	an	extreme.	But	there	are	times	when the	most	extreme	measures	are	justified.	Let’s	think	now	that	we	have	to	kill McCluskey.	The	way	to	do	it	would	be	to	have	him	heavily	implicated	so	that it’s	not	an	honest	police	captain	doing	his	duty	but	a	crooked	police	official mixed	up	in	the	rackets	who	got	what	was	coming	to	him,	like	any	crook.	We have	newspaper	people	on	our	payroll	we	can	give	that	story	to	with	enough proof	so	that	they	can	back	it	up.	That	should	take	some	of	the	heat	off.	How does	that	sound?”	Michael	looked	around	deferentially	to	the	others.	Tessio	and Clemenza	had	gloomy	faces	and	refused	to	speak.	Sonny	said	with	the	same	odd smile,	“Go	on,	kid,	you’re	doing	great.	Out	of	the	mouths	of	infants,	as	the	Don always	used	to	say.	Go	ahead,	Mike,	tell	us	more.”
																Hagen	was	smiling	too	a	little	and	averting	his	head.	Michael	flushed. “Well,	they	want	me	to	go	to	a	conference	with	Sollozzo.	It	will	be	me,	Sollozzo and	McCluskey	all	on	our	own.	Set	up	the	meeting	for	two	days	from	now,	then get	o_Robnformers	to	find	out	where	the	meeting	will	be	held.	Insist	that	it	has to	be	a	public	place,	that	I’m	not	going	to	let	them	take	me	into	any	apartments or	houses.	Let	it	be	a	restaurant	or	a	bar	at	the	height	of	the	dinner	hour, something	like	that,	so	that	I’ll	feel	safe.	They’ll	feel	safe	too.	Even	Sollozzo won’t	figure	that	we’ll	dare	to	gun	the	captain.	They’ll	frisk	me	when	I	meet them	so	I’ll	have	to	be	clean	then,	but	figure	out	a	way	you	can	get	a	weapon	to me	while	I’m	meeting	them.	Then	I’ll	take	both	of	them.”
																All	four	heads	turned	and	stared	at	him.	Clemenza	and	Tessio	were gravely	astonished.	Hagen	looked	a	little	sad	but	not	surprised.	He	started	to speak	and	thought	better	of	it.	But	Sonny.	his	heavy	Cupid’s	face	twitching	with mirth,	suddenly	broke	out	in	loud	roars	of	laughter.	It	was	deep	belly	laughter, not	faking.	He	was	really	breaking	up.	He	pointed	a	finger	at	Michael,	trying	to speak	through	gasps	of	mirth.	“You,	the	high-class	college	kid,	you	never wanted	to	get	mixed	up	in	the	Family	business.	Now	you	wanta	kill	a	police captain	and	the	Turk	just	because	you	got	your	face	smashed	by	McCluskey. You’re	taking	it	personal,	it’s	just	business	and	you’re	taking	it	personal.	You wanta	kill	these	two	guys	just	because	you	got	slapped	in	the	face.	It	was	all	a	lot of	crap.	All	these	years	it	was	just	a	lot	of	crap.”
																Clemenza	and	Tessio,	completely	misunderstanding,	thinking	that
Sonny	was	laughing	at	his	young	brother’s	bravado	for	making	such	an	offer, were	also	smiling	broadly	and	a	little	patronizingly	at	Michael.	Only	Hagen warily	kept	his	face	impassive.
																Michael	looked	around	at	all	of	them,	then	stared	at	Sonny,	who	still couldn’t	stop	laughing.	“You’ll	take	both	of	them?”	Sonny	said.	“Hey,	kid,	they won’t	give	you	medals,	they	put	you	in	the	electric	chair.	You	know	that?	This	is no	hero	business,	kid,	you	don’t	shoot	people	from	a	mile	away.	You	shoot	when you	see	the	whites	of	their	eyes	like	we	got	taught	in	school,	remember?	You gotta	stand	right	next	to	them	and	blow	their	heads	off	and	their	brains	get	all over	your	nice	Ivy	League	suit.	How	about	that,	kid,	you	wanta	do	that	just because	some	dumb	cop	slapped	you	around?”	He	was	still	laughing.
																Michael	stood	up.	“You’d	better	stop	laughing,”	he	said.	The	change in	him	was	so	extraordinary	that	the	smiles	vanished	from	the	faces	of	Clemenza and	Tessio.	Michael	was	not	tall	or	heavily	built	but	his	presence	seemed	to radiate	danger.	In	that	moment	he	was	a	reincarnation	of	Don	Corleone	himself. His	eyes	had	gone	a	pale	tan	and	his	face	was	bleached	of	color.	He	seemed	at any	moment	about	to	fling	himself	on	his	older	and	stronger	brother.	There	was no	doubt	that	if	he	had	had	a	weapon	in	his	hands	Sonny	would	have	been	in danger.	Sonny	stopped	laughing,	and	Michael	said	to	him	in	a	cold	deadly	voice, “Don’t	you	think	I	can	do	it,	you	son	of	a	bitch?”
																Sonny	had	got	over	his	laughing	fit.	“I	know	you	can	do	it,”	he	said.	“I wasn’t	laughing	at	what	you	said.	I	was	just	laughing	at	how	funny	things	turn out.	I	always	said	you	were	the	toughest	one	in	the	Family,	tougher	than	the	Don himself.	You	were	the	only	one	who	could	stand	off	the	old	man.	I	remember you	when	you	were	a	kid.	What	a	temper	you	had	then.	Hell,	you	even	used	to fight	me	and	I	was	a	lot	older	than	you.	And	Freddie	had	to	beat	the	shit	out	of you	at	least	once	a	week.	And	now	Sollozzo	has	you	figured	for	the	soft	touch	in the	Family	because	you	let	McCluskey	hit	you	without	fighting	back	and	you wouldn’t	get	mixed	up	in	the	Family	fights.	He	figures	he	got	nothing	to	worry about	if	he	meets	you	head	to	head.	And	McCluskey	too,	he’s	got	you	figured for	a	yellow	guinea.”	Sonny	paused	and	then	said	softly,	“But	you’re	a	Corleone after	all,	you	son	of	a	bitch.	And	I	was	the	only	one	who	knew	it.	I’ve	been sitting	here	waiting	for	the	last	three	days,	ever	since	the	old	man	got	shot,
waiting	for	you	to	crack	out	of	that	Ivy	League,	war	hero	bullshit	character you’ve	been	wearing.	I’ve	been	waiting	for	you	to	become	my	right	arm	so	we can	kill	those	fucks	that	are	trying	to	destroy	our	father	and	our	Family.	And	all it	took	was	a	sock	on	the	jaw.	How	do	you	like	that?”	Sonny	made	a	comical gesture,	a	punch,	and	repeated,	“How	do	you	like	that?”
																The	tension	had	relaxed	in	the	room.	Mike	shook	his	head.	“Sonny, I’m	doing	it	because	it’s	the	only	thing	to	do.	I	can’t	give	Sollozzo	another	crack at	the	old	man.	I	seem	to	be	the	only	one	who	can	get	close	enough	to	him.	And	I figured	it	out.	I	don’t	think	you	can	get	anybody	else	to	knock	off	a	police captain.	Maybe	you	would	do	it,	Sonny,	but	you	have	a	wife	and	kids	and	you have	to	run	the	Family	business	until	the	old	man	is	in	shape.	So	that	leaves	me and	Freddie.	Freddie	is	in	shock	and	out	of	action.	Finally	that	leaves	just	me. It’s	all	logic.	The	sock	on	the	jaw	had	nothing	to	do	with	it.”
																Sonny	came	over	and	embraced	him.	“I	don’t	give	a	damn	what	your reasons	are,	just	so	long	as	you’re	with	us	now.	And	I’ll	tell	you	another	thing, you’re	right	all	the	way.	Tom,	what’s	your	say?”
																Hagen	shrugged.	“The	reasoning	is	solid.	What	makes	it	so	is	that	I don’t	think	the	Turk	is	sincere	about	a	deal.	I	think	he’ll	still	try	to	get	at	the Don.	Anyway	on	his	past	performance	that’s	how	we	have	to	figure	him.	So	we try	to	get	Sollozzo.	We	get	him	even	if	we	have	to	get	the	police	captain.	But whoever	does	the	job	is	going	to	get	an	awful	lot	of	heat.	Does	it	have	to	be Mike?”
																Sonny	said	softly,	“I	could	do	it.”
																Hagen	shook	his	head	impatiently.	“Sollozzo	wouldn’t	let	you	get within	a	mile	of	him	if	he	had	ten	police	captains.	And	besides	you’re	the	acting head	of	the	Family.	You	can’t	be	risked.”	Hagen	paused	and	said	to	Clemenza and	Tessio,	“Do	either	one	of	you	have	a	top	button	man,	someone	really special,	who	would	take	on	this	job?	He	wouldn’t	have	to	worry	about	money for	the	rest	of	his	life.”
																Clemenza	spoke	first.	“Nobody	that	Sollozzo	wouldn’t	know,	he’d
catch	on	right	away.	He’d	catch	on	if	me	or	Tessio	went	too.”
																Hagen	said,	“What	about	somebody	really	tough	who	hasn’t	made	his rep	yet,	a	good	rookie?”
																Both	caporegimes	shook	their	heads.	Tessio	smiled	to	take	the	sting out	of	his	words	and	said,	“That’s	like	bringing	a	guy	up	from	the	minors	to pitch	the	World	Series.”
																Sonny	broke	in	curtly,	“It	has	to	be	Mike.	For	a	million	different reasons.	Most	important	they	got	him	down	as	faggy.	And	he	can	do	the	job,	I guarantee	that,	and	that’s	important	because	this	is	the	only	shot	we’ll	get	at	that sneaky	bastard	Turk.	So	now	we	have	to	figure	out	the	best	way	to	back	him	up. Tom,	Clemenza,	Tessio,	find	out	where	Sollozzo	will	take	him	for	the conference,	I	don’t	care	how	much	it	costs.	When	we	find	that	out	we	can	figure out	how	we	can	get	a	weapon	into	his	hands.	Clemenza,	I	want	you	to	get	him	a really	‘safe’	gun	out	of	your	collection,	the	‘coldest’	one	you	got.	Impossible	to trace.	Try	to	make	it	short	barrel	with	a	lot	of	blasting	power.	It	doesn’t	have	to be	accurate.	He’ll	be	right	on	top	of	them	when	he	uses	it.	Mike,	as	soon	as you’ve	used	the	gun,	drop	it	on	the	floor.	Don’t	be	caught	with	it	on	you. Clemenza,	tape	the	barrel	and	the	trigger	with	that	special	stuff	you	got	so	he won’t	leave	prints.	Remember,	Mike,	we	can	square	everything,	witnesses,	and so	forth,	but	if	they	catch	you	with	the	gun	on	you	we	can’t	square	that.	We’ll have	transportation	and	protection	and	then	we’ll	make	you	disappear	for	a	nice long	vacation	until	the	heat	wears	off.	You’ll	be	gone	a	long	time,	Mike,	but	I don’t	want	you	saying	good-bye	to	your	girl	friend	or	even	calling	her.	After	it’s all	over	and	you’re	out	of	the	country	I’ll	send	her	word	that	you’re	OK.	Those are	orders.”	Sonny	smiled	at	his	brother.	“Now	stick	with	Clemenza	and	get	used to	handling	the	gun	he	picks	out	for	you.	Maybe	even	practice	a	little.	We’ll	take care	of	everything	else.	Everything.	OK,	kid?”
																Again	Michael	Corleone	felt	that	delicious	refreshing	chilliness	all over	his	body.	He	said	to	his	brother,	“You	didn’t	have	to	give	me	that	crap about	not	talking	to	my	girl	friend	about	something	like	this.	What	the	hell	did you	think	I	was	going	to	do,	call	her	up	to	say	good-bye?”
																Sonny	said	hastily,	“OK,	but	you’re	still	a	rookie	so	I	spell	things	out. Forget	it.”
																Michael	said	with	a	grin,	“What	the	hell	do	you	mean,	a	rookie?	I listened	to	the	old	man	just	as	hard	as	you	did.	How	do	you	think	I	got	so smart?”	They	both	laughed.
																Hagen	poured	drinks	for	everyone.	He	looked	a	little	glum.	The statesman	forced	to	go	to	war,	the	lawyer	forced	to	go	to	law.	“Well,	anyway, now	we	know	what	we’re	going	to	do,”	he	said.
	
Chapter	11
	
																Captain	Mark	McCluskey	sat	in	his	office	fingering	three	envelopes bulging	with	betting	slips.	He	was	frowning	and	wishing	he	could	decode	the notations	on	the	slips.	It	was	very	important	that	he	do	so.	The	envelopes	were the	betting	slips	that	his	raiding	parties	had	picked	up	when	they	had	hit	one	of the	Corleone	Family	bookmakers	the	night	before.	Now	the	bookmaker	would have	to	buy	back	the	slips	so	that	players	couldn’t	claim	winners	and	wipe	him out.
																It	was	very	important	for	Captain	McCluskey	to	decode	the	slips because	he	didn’t	want	to	get	cheated	when	he	sold	the	slips	back	to	the bookmaker.	If	there	was	fifty	grand	worth	of	action,	then	maybe	he	could	sell	it back	for	five	grand.	But	if	there	were	a	lot	of	heavy	bets	and	the	slips represented	a	hundred	grand	or	maybe	even	two	hundred	grand,	then	the	price should	be	considerably	higher.	McCluskey	fiddled	with	the	envelopes	and	then decided	to	let	the	bookie	sweat	a	little	bit	and	make	the	first	offer.	That	might	tip off	what	the	real	price	should	be.
																McCluskey	looked	at	the	station	house	clock	on	the	wall	of	his	office. It	was	time	for	him	to	pick	up	that	greasy	Turk,	Sollozzo,	and	take	him	to
wherever	he	was	going	to	meet	the	Corleone	Family.	McCluskey	went	over	to his	wall	locker	and	started	to	change	into	his	civilian	clothes.	When	he	was finished	he	called	his	wife	and	told	her	he	would	not	be	home	for	supper	that night,	that	he	would	be	out	on	the	job.	He	never	confided	in	his	wife	on anything.	She	thought	they	lived	the	way	they	did	on	his	policeman’s	salary. McCluskey	grunted	with	amusement.	His	mother	had	thought	the	same	thing	but he	had	learned	early.	His	father	had	shown	him	the	ropes.,
																His	father	had	been	a	police	sergeant,	and	every	week	father	and	son had	walked	through	the	precinct	and	McCluskey	Senior	had	introduced	his	sixyear-old	son	to	the	storekeepers,	saying,	“	And	this	is	my	little	boy.”
																The	storekeepers	would	shake	his	hand	and	compliment	him extravagantly	and	ring	open	their	cash	registers	to	give	the	little	boy	a	gift	of	five or	ten	dollars.	At	the	end	of	the	day,	little	Mark	McCluskey	would	have	all	the pockets	of	his	suit	stuffed	with	paper	money,	would	feel	so	proud	that	his father’s	friends	liked	him	well	enough	to	give	him	a	present	every	month	they saw	him.	Of	course	his	father	put	the	money	in	the	bank	for	him,	for	his	college education,	and	little	Mark	got	at	most	a	fifty-cent	piece	for	himself.
																Then	when	Mark	got	home	and	his	policemen	uncles	asked	him	what he	wanted	to	be	when	he	grew	up	and	he	would	lisp	childishly,	“	A	policeman,” they	would	all	laugh	uproariously.	And	of	course	later	on,	though	his	father wanted	him	to	go	to	college	first,	he	went	right	from	high	school	to	studying	for the	police	force.
																He	had	been	a	good	cop,	a	brave	cop.	The	tough	young	punks terrorizing	street	corners	fled	when	he	approached	and	finally	vanished	from	his beat	altogether.	He	was	a	very	tough	cop	and	a	very	fair	one.	He	never	took	his son	around	to	the	storekeepers	to	collect	his	money	presents	for	ignoring	garbage violations	and	parking	violations;	he	took	the	money	directly	into	his	own	hand, direct	because	he	felt	he	earned	it.	He	never	ducked	into	a	movie	house	or goofed	off	into	restaurants	when	he	was	on	foot	patrol	as	some	of	the	other	cops did,	especially	on	winter	nights.	He	always	made	his	rounds.	He	gave	his	stores a	lot	of	protection,	a	lot	of	service.	When	winos	and	drunks	filtered	up	from	the Bowery	to	panhandle	on	his	beat	he	got	rid	of	them	so	roughly	that	they	never