	Johnny	Fontane	grinned	at	him.	“Except	my	Godfather.	And	you.	No, Tom,	it’s	not	a	lot	of	crap.	An	Academy	Award	can	make	an	actor	for	ten	years. He	can	get	his	pick	of	roles.	The	public	goes	to	see	him.	It’s	not	everything,	but for	an	actor	it’s	the	most	important	thing	in	the	business.	I’m	counting	on winning	it.	Not	because	I’m	such	a	great	actor	but	because	I’m	known	primarily as	a	singer	and	the	part	is	foolproof.	And	I’m	pretty	good	too,	no	kidding.”
																Tom	Hagen	shrugged	and	said,	“Your	Godfather	tells	me	that	the	way things	stand	now,	you	don’t	have	a	chance	of	winning	the	award.”
																Johnny	Fontane	was	angry.	“What	the	hell	are	you	talking	about?	The picture	hasn’t	even	been	cut	yet,	much	less	shown.	And	the	Don	isn’t	even	in	the movie	business.	Why	the	hell	did	you	fly	the	three	thousand	miles	just	to	tell	me that	shit?”	He	was	so	shaken	he	was	almost	in	tears.
																Hagen	said	worriedly,	“Johnny,	I	don’t	know	a	damn	thing	about	all this	movie	stuff.	Remember,	I’m	just	a	messenger	boy	for	the	Don.	But	we	have discussed	this	whole	business	of	yours	many	times.	He	worries	about	you,	about your	future.	He	feels	you	still	need	his	help	and	he	wants	to	settle	your	problem once	and	for	all.	That’s	why	I’m	here	now,	to	get	things	rolling.	But	you	have	to start	growing	up,	Johnny.	You	have	to	stop	thinking	about	yourself	as	a	singer	or an	actor.	You’ve	got	to	start	thinking	about	yourself	as	a	prime	mover,	as	a	guy with	muscle.”
																Johnny	Fontane	laughed	and	filled	his	glass.	“If	I	don’t	win	that	Oscar I’ll	have	as	much	muscle	as	one	of	my	daughters.	My	voice	is	gone;	if	I	had	that back	I	could	make	some	moves.	Oh,	hell.	How	does	my	Godfather	know	I	won’t win	it?	OK,	I	believe	he	knows.	He’s	never	been	wrong.”
																Hagen	lit	a	thin	cigar.	“We	got	the	word	that	Jack	Woltz	won’t	spend studio	money	to	support	your	candidacy.	In	fact	he’s	sent	the	word	out	to everybody	who	votes	that	he	does	not	want	you	to	win.	But	holding	back	the money	for	ads	and	all	that	may	do	it.	He’s	also	arranging	to	have	one	other	guy get	as	much	of	the	opposition	votes	as	he	can	swing.	He’s	using	all	sorts	of bribes--jobs,	money,	broads,	everything.	And	he’s	trying	to	do	it	without	hurting the	picture	or	hurting	it	as	little	as	possible.”
																Johnny	Fontane	shrugged.	He	filled	his	glass	with	whiskey	and downed	it.	“Then	I’m	dead.”
																Hagen	was	watching	him	with	his	mouth	curled	up	with	distaste. “Drinking	won’t	help	your	voice,”	he	said.
																“Fuck	you,”	Johnny	said.
																Hagen’s	face	suddenly	became	smoothly	impassive.	Then	he	said, “OK,	I’ll	keep	this	purely	business.”
																Johnny	Fontane	put	his	drink	down	and	went	over	to	stand	in	front	of Hagen.	“I’m	sorry	I	said	that,	Tom,”	he	said.	“Christ,	I’m	sorry.	I’m	taking	it	out on	you	because	I	wanta	kill	that	bastard	Jack	Woltz	and	I’m	afraid	to	tell	off	my Godfather.	So	I	get	sore	at	you.”	There	were	tears	in	his	eyes.	He	threw	the empty	whiskey	glass	against	the	wall	but	so	weakly	that	the	heavy	shot	glass	did not	even	shatter	and	rolled	along	the	floor	back	to	him	so	that	he	looked	down	at it	in	baffled	fury.	Then	he	laughed.	“Jesus	Christ,”	he	said.
																He	walked	over	to	the	other	side	of	the	room	and	sat	opposite	Hagen. “You	know,	I	had	everything	my	own	way	for	a	long	time.	Then	I	divorced Ginny	and	everything	started	going	sour.	I	lost	my	voice.	My	records	stopped selling.	I	didn’t	get	any	more	movie	work.	And	then	my	Godfather	got	sore	at me	and	wouldn’t	talk	to	me	on	the	phone	or	see	me	when	I	came	into	New	York. You	were	always	the	guy	barring	the	path	and	I	blamed	you,	but	I	knew	you wouldn’t	do	it	without	orders	from	the	Don.	But	you	can’t	get	sore	at	him.	It’s like	getting	sore	at	God.	So	I	curse	you.	But	you’ve	been	right	all	along	the	line. And	to	show	you	I	mean	my	apology	I’m	taking	your	advice.	No	more	booze until	I	get	my	voice	back.	OK?”
																The	apology	was	sincere.	Hagen	forgot	his	anger.	There	must	be something	to	this	thirty-five-year-old	boy	or	the	Don	would	not	be	so	fond	of him.	He	said,	“Forget	it,	Johnny.”	He	was	embarrassed	at	the	depth	of	Johnny’s feeling	and	embarrassed	by	the	suspicion	that	it	might	have	been	inspired	by fear,	fear	that	he	might	turn	the	Don	against	him.	And	of	course	the	Don	could never	be	turned	by	anyone	for	any	reason.	His	affection	was	mutable	only	by
himself.
																“Things	aren’t	so	bad,”	he	told	Johnny.	“The	Don	says	he	can	cancel out	everything	Woltz	does	against	you.	That	you	will	almost	certainly	win	the Award.	But	he	feels	that	won’t	solve	your	problem.	He	wants	to	know	if	you have	the	brains	and	balls	to	become	a	producer	on	your	own,	make	your	own movies	from	top	to	bottom.”
																“How	the	hell	is	he	going	to	get	me	the	Award?”	Johnny	asked incredulously.
																Hagen	said	sharply,	“How	do	you	find	it	so	easy	to	believe	that	Woltz can	finagle	it	and	your	Godfather	can’t?	Now	since	it’s	necessary	to	get	your faith	for	the	other	part	of	our	deal	I	must	tell	you	this.	Just	keep	it	to	yourself. Your	Godfather	is	a	much	more	powerful	man	than	Jack	Woltz.	And	he	is	much more	powerful	in	areas	far	more	critical.	How	can	he	swing	the	Award?	He controls,	or	controls	the	people	who	control,	all	the	labor	unions	in	the	industry, all	the	people	or	nearly	all	the	people	who	vote.	Of	course	you	have	to	be	good, you	have	to	be	in	contention	on	your	own	merits.	And	your	Godfather	has	more brains	than	Jack	Woltz.	He	doesn’t	go	up	to	these	people	and	put	a	gun	to	their heads	and	say,	‘Vote	for	Johnny	Fontane	or	you	are	out	of	a	job.’	He	doesn’t strong-arm	where	strong-arm	doesn’t	work	or	leaves	too	many	hard	feelings. He’ll	make	those	people	vote	for	you	because	they	want	to.	But	they	won’t	want to	unless	he	takes	an	interest.	Now	just	take	my	word	for	it	that	he	can	get	you the	Award.	And	that	if	he	doesn’t	do	it,	you	won’t	get	it.”
																“OK,”	Johnny	said.	“I	believe	you.	And	I	have	the	balls	and	brains	to be	a	producer	but	I	don’t	have	the	money.	No	bank	would	finance	me.	It	takes millions	to	support	a	movie.”
																Hagen	said	dryly,	“When	you	get	the	Award,	start	making	plans	to produce	three	of	your	own	movies.	Hire	the	best	people	in	the	business,	the	best technicians,	the	best	stars,	whoever	you	need.	Plan	on	three	to	five	movies.”
																“You’re	crazy,”	Johnny	said.	“That	many	movies	could	mean	twenty million	bucks.”
																“When	you	need	the	money,”	Hagen	said,	“get	in	touch	with	me.	I’ll give	you	the	name	of	the	bank	out	here	in	California	to	ask	for	financing.	Don’t worry,	they	finance	movies	all	the	time.	Just	ask	them	for	the	money	in	the ordinary	way,	with	the	proper	justifications,	like	a	regular	business	deal.	They will	approve.	But	first	you	have	to	see	me	and	tell	me	the	figures	and	the	plans. OK?”
																Johnny	was	silent	for	a	long	time.	Then	he	said	quietly,	“Is	there anything	else?”
																Hagen	smiled.	“You	mean,	do	you	have	to	do	any	favors	in	return	for	a loan	of	twenty	million	dollars?	Sure	you	will.”	He	waited	for	Johnny	to	say something...Nothing	you	wouldn’t	do	anyway	if	the	Don	asked	you	to	do	it	for him.”
																Johnny	said,	“The	Don	has	to	ask	me	himself	if	it’s	something	serious, you	know	what	I	mean?	I	won’t	take	your	word	or	Sonny’s	for	it.”
																Hagen	was	surprised	by	this	good	sense.	Fontane	had	some	brains	after all.	He	had	sense	to	know	that	the	Don	was	too	fond	of	him,	and	too	smart,	to ask	him	to	do	something	foolishly	dangerous,	whereas	Sonny	might.	He	said	to Johnny,	“Let	me	reassure	you	on	one	thing.	Your	Godfather	has	given	me	and Sonny	strict	instructions	not	to	involve	you	in	any	way	in	anything	that	might	get you	bad	publicity	through	our	fault.	And	he	will	never	do	that	himself.	I guarantee	you	that	any	favor	he	asks	of	you,	you	will	offer	to	do	before	he requests	it.	OK?”
																Johnny	smiled.	“OK,”	he	said.
																Hagen	said,	“	Also	he	has	faith	in	you.	He	thinks	you	have	brains	and so	he	hildres	the	bank	will	make	money	on	the	investment,	which	means	he	will make	money	on	it.	So	it’s	really	a	business	deal,	never	forget	that.	Don’t	go screwing	around	with	the	money.	You	may	be	his	favorite	godson	but	twenty million	bucks	is	a	lot	of	dough.	He	has	to	stick	his	neck	out	to	make	sure	you	get it.”
																“Tell	him	not	to	worry,”	Johnny	said.	“If	a	guy	like	Jack	Woltz	can	be a	big	movie	genius,	anybody	can.”
																“That’s	what	your	Godfather	figures,”	Hagen	said.	“Can	you	have	me driven	back	to	the	airport?	I’ve	said	all	I	have	to	say.	When	you	do	start	signing contracts	for	everything,	hire	your	own	lawyers,	I	won’t	be	in	on	it.	But	I’d	like to	see	everything	before	you	sign,	if	that’s	OK	with	you.	Also,	you’ll	never	have any	labor	troubles.	That	will	cut	costs	on	your	pictures	to	some	extent,	so	when the	accountants	lump	some	of	that	in,	disregard	those	figures.”
																Johnny	said	cautiously,	“Do	I	have	to	get	your	OK	on	anything	else, scripts,	stars,	any	of	that?”
																Hagen	shook	his	head.	“No,”	he	said.	“It	may	happen	that	the	Don would	object	to	something	but	he’ll	object	to	you	direct	if	he	does.	But	I	can’t imagine	what	that	would	be.	Movies	don’t	affect	him	at	all,	in	any	way,	so	he has	no	interest.	And	he	doesn’t	believe	in	meddling,	that	I	can	tell	you	from experience.”
																“Good,”	Johnny	said.	“I’ll	drive	you	to	the	airport	myself.	And	thank the	Godfather	for	me.	I’d	call	him	up	and	thank	him	but	he	never	comes	to	the phone.	Why	is	that,	by	the	way?”
																Hagen	shrugged.	“He	hardly	ever	talks	on	the	phone.	He	doesn’t	want his	voice	recorded,	even	saying	something	perfectly	innocent:	He’s	afraid	that they	can	splice	the	words	together	so	that	it	sounds	as	if	he	says	something	else. I	think	that’s	what	it	is.	Anyway	his	only	worry	is	that	someday	he’ll	be	framed by	the	authorities.	So	he	doesn’t	want	to	give	them	an	edge.”
																They	got	into	Johnny’s	car	and	drove	to	the	airport.	Hagen	was thinking	that	Johnny	was	a	better	guy	than	he	figured.	He’d	already	learned something,	just	his	driving	him	personally	to	the	airport	proved	that.	The personal	courtesy,	something	the	Don	himself	always	believed	in.	And	the apology.	That	had	been	sincere.	He	had	known	Johnny	a	long	time	and	he	knew the	apology	would	never	be	made	out	of	fear.	Johnny	had	always	had	guts. That’s	why	he	had	always	been	in	trouble,	with	his	movie	bosses	and	with	his
women.	He	was	also	one	of	the	few	people	who	was	not	afraid	of	the	Don. Fontane	and	Michael	were	maybe	the	only	two	men	Hagen	knew	of	whom	this could	be	said.	So	the	apology	was	sincere,	he	would	accept	it	as	such.	He	and Johnny	would	have	to	see	a	lot	of	each	other	in	the	next	few	years.	And	Johnny would	have	to	pass	the	next	test,	which	would	prove	how	smart	he	was.	He would	have	to	do	something	for	the	Don	that	the	Don	would	never	ask	him	to	do or	insist	that	he	do	as	part	of	the	agreement.	Hagen	wondered	if	Johnny	Fontane was	smart	enough	to	figure	out	that	part	of	the	bargain.
															
																After	Johnny	dropped	Hagen	off	at	the	airport	(Hagen	insisted	that Johnny	not	hang	around	for	his	plane	with	him)	he	drove	back	to	Ginny’s	house. She	was	surprised	to	see	him.	But	he	wanted	to	stay	at	her	place	so	that	he	would have	time	to	think	things	out,	to	make	his	plans.	He	knew	that	what	Hagen	had told	him	was	extremely	important,	that	his	whole	life	was	being	changed.	He	had once	been	a	big	star	but	now	at	the	young	age	of	thirty-five	he	was	washed	up. He	didn’t	kid	himself	about	that.	Even	if	he	won	the	Award	as	best	actor,	what the	hell	could	it	mean	at	the	most?	Nothing,	if	his	voice	didn’t	come	back.	He’d be	just	second-rate,	with	no	real	power,	no	real	juice.	Even	that	girl	turning	him down,	she	had	been	nice	and	smart	and	acting	sort	of	hip,	but	would	she	have been	so	cool	if	he	had	really	been	at	the	top?	Now	with	the	Don	backing	him with	dough	he	could	be	as	big	as	anybody	in	Hollywood.	He	could	be	a	king. Johnny	smiled.	Hell.	He	could	even	be	a	Don.
																It	would	be	nice	living	with	Ginny	again	for	a	few	weeks,	maybe longer.	He’d	take	the	kids	out	every	day,	maybe	have	a	few	friends	over.	He’d stop	drinking	and	smoking,	really	take	care	of	himself.	Maybe	his	voice	would get	strong	again.	If	that	happened	and	with	the	Don’s	money,	he’d	be unbeatable.	He’d	really	be	as	close	to	an	oldtime	king	or	emperor	as	it	was possible	to	be	in	America.	And	it	wouldn’t	depend	on	his	voice	holding	up	or how	long	the	public	cared	about	him	as	an	actor.	It	would	be	an	empire	rooted	in money	and	the	most	special,	the	most	coveted	kind	of	power.
																Ginny	had	the	guest	bedroom	made	up	for	him.	It	was	understood	that he	would	not	share	her	room,	that	they	would	not	live	as	man	and	wife.	They
could	never	have	that	relationship	again.	And	though	the	outside	world	of	gossip columnists	and	movie	fans	gave	the	blame	for	the	failure	of	their	marriage	solely to	him,	yet	in	a	curious	way,	between	the	two	of	them,	they	both	knew	that	she was	even	more	to	blame	for	their	divorce.
																When	Johnny	Fontane	became	the	most	popular	singer	and	movie musical	comedy	star	in	motion	pictures,	it	had	never	occurred	to	him	to	desert his	wife	and	children.	He	was	too	Italian,	still	too	old-style.	Naturally	he	had been	unfaithful.	That	had	been	impossible	to	avoid	in	his	business	and	the temptations	to	which	he	was	continually	exposed.	And	despite	being	a	skinny, delicate-looking	guy,	he	had	the	wiry	horniness	of	many	small-boned	Latin types.	And	women	delighted	him	in	their	surprises.	He	loved	going	out	with	a demure	sweet-faced	virginal-looking	girl	and	then	uncapping	her	breasts	to	find them	so	unexpectedly	slopingly	full	and	rich,	lewdly	heavy	in	contrast	to	the cameo	face.	He	loved	to	find	sexual	shyness	and	timidity	in	the	sexy-looking girls	who	were	all	fake	motion	like	a	shifty	basketball	player,	vamping	as	if	they had	slept	with	a	hundred	guys,	and	then	when	he	got	them	alone	having	to	battle for	hours	to	get	in	and	do	the	job	and	finding	out	they	were	virgins.
																And	all	these	Hollywood	guys	laughed	at	his	fondness	for	virgins. They	called	it	an	old	guinea	taste,	square,	and	look	how	long	it	took	to	make	a virgin	give	you	a	blow	job	with	all	the	aggravation	and	then	they	usually	turned out	to	be	a	lousy	piece	of	ass.	But	Johnny	knew	that	it	was	how	you	handled	a young	girl.	You	had	to	come	on	to	her	the	right	way	and	then	what	could	be greater	than	a	girl	who	was	tasting	her	first	dick	and	loving	it?	Ah,	it	was	so great	breaking	them	in.	It	was	so	great	having	them	wrap	their	legs	around	you. Their	thighs	were	all	different	shapes,	their	asses	were	different,	their	skins	were all	different	colors	and	shades	of	white	and	brown	and	tan	and	when	he	had	slept with	that	young	colored	girl	in	Detroit,	a	good	girl,	not	a	hustler,	the	young daughter	of	a	jazz	singer	on	the	same	nightclub	bill	with	him,	she	had	been	one of	the	sweetest	things	he	had	ever	had.	Her	lips	had	really	tasted	like	warm honey	with	pepper	mixed	in	it,	her	dark	brown	skin	was	rich,	creamy,	and	she had	been	as	sweet	as	God	had	ever	made	any	woman	and	she	had	been	a	virgin.
																And	the	other	guys	were	always	talking	about	blow	jobs,	this	and	other variations,	and	he	really	didn’t	enjoy	that	stuff	so	much.	He	never	liked	a	girl
that	much	after	they	tried	it	that	way,	it	just	didn’t	satisfy	him	right.	He	and	his second	wife	had	finally	not	got	along,	because	she	preferred	the	old	sixty-nine too	much	to	a	point	where	she	didn’t	want	anything	else	and	he	had	to	fight	to stick	it	in.	She	began	making	fun	of	him	and	calling	him	a	square	and	the	word got	around	that	he	made	love	like	a	kid.	Maybe	that	was	why	that	girl	last	night had	turned	him	down.	Well,	the	hell	with	it,	she	wouldn’t	be	too	great	in	the	sack anyway.	You	could	tell	a	girl	who	really	liked	to	fuck	and	they	were	always	the best.	Especially	the	ones	who	hadn’t	been	at	it	too	long.	What	he	really	hated were	the	ones	who	had	started	screwing	at	twelve	and	were	all	fucked	out	by	the time	they	were	twenty	and	just	going	through	the	motions	and	some	of	them were	the	prettiest	of	all	and	could	fake	you	out.
																Ginny	brought	coffee	and	cake	into	his	bedroom	and	put	it	on	the	long table	in	the	sitting	room	part.	He	told	her	simply	that	Hagen	was	helping	him	put together	the	money	credit	for	a	producing	package	and	she	was	excited	about that.	He	would	be	important	again.	But	she	had	no	idea	of	how	powerful	Don Corleone	really	was	so	she	didn’t	understand	the	significance	of	Hagen	coming from	New	York.	He	told	her	Hagen	was	also	helping	with	legal	details.
																When	they	had	finished	the	coffee	he	told	her	he	was	going	to	work that	night,	and	make	phone	calls	and	plans	for	the	future.	“Half	of	all	this	will	be in	the	kids’	names,”	he	told	her.	She	gave	him	a	grateful	smile	and	kissed	him good	night	before	she	left	his	room.
																There	was	a	glass	dish	full	of	his	favorite	monogrammed	cigarettes,	a humidor	with	pencil-thin	black	Cuban	cigars	on	his	writing	desk.	Johnny	tilted back	and	started	making	calls.	His	brain	was	really	whirring	along.	He	called	the author	of	the	book,	the	best-selling	novel,	on	which	his	new	film	was	based.	The author	was	a	guy	his	own	age	who	had	come	up	the	hard	way	and	was	now	a celebrity	in	the	literary	world.	He	had	come	out	to	Hollywood	expecting	to	be treated	like	a	wheel	and,	like	most	authors,	had	been	treated	like	shit.	Johnny	had seen	the	humiliation	of	the	author	one	night	at	the	Brown	Derby.	The	writer	had been	fixed	up	with	a	well	known	bosomy	starlet	for	a	date	on	the	town	and	a sure	shack-up	later.	But	while	they	were	at	dinner	the	starlet	had	deserted	the famous	author	because	a	ratty-looking	movie	comic	had	waggled	his	finger	at her.	That	had	given	the	writer	the	right	slant	on	just	who	was	who	in	the
Hollywood	pecking	order.	It	didn’t	matter	that	his	book	had	made	him	world famous.	A	starlet	would	prefer	the	crummiest,	the	rattiest,	the	phoniest	movie wheel.
																Now	Johnny	called	the	author	at	his	New	York	home	to	thank	him	for the	great	part	he	had	written	in	his	book	for	him.	He	flattered	the	shit	out	of	the guy.	Then	casually	he	asked	him	how	he	was	doing	on	his	next	novel	and	what	it was	all	about.	He	lit	a	cigar	while	the	author	told	him	about	a	specially interesting	chapter	and	then	finally	said,	“Gee,	I’d	like	to	read	it	when	you’re finished.	How	about	sending	me	a	copy?	Maybe	I	can	get	you	a	good	deal	for	it, better	than	you	got	with	Woltz.”
																The	eagerness	in	the	author’s	voice	told	him	that	he	had	guessed	right. Woltz	had	chiseled	the	guy,	given	him	peanuts	for	the	book.	Johnny	mentioned that	he	might	be	in	New	York	right	after	the	holidays	and	would	the	author	want to	come	and	have	dinner	with	some	of	his	friends.	“I	know	a	few	good-looking broads,”	Johnny	said	jokingly.	The	author	laughed	and	said	OK.
																Next	Johnny	called	up	the	director	and	cameraman	on	the	film	he	had just	finished	to	thank	them	for	having	helped	him	in	the	film.	He	told	them confidentially	that	he	knew	Woltz	had	been	against	him	and	he	doubly appreciated	their	help	and	that	if	there	was	ever	anything	he	could	do	for	them they	should	just	call.
																Then	he	made	the	hardest	call	of	all,	the	one	to	Jack	Woltz.	He thanked	him	for	the	part	in	the	picture	and	told	him	how	happy	he	would	be	to work	for	him	anytime.	He	did	this	merely	to	throw	Woltz	off	the	track.	He	had always	been	very	square,	very	straight.	In	a	few	days	Woltz	would	find	out	about his	maneuvering	and	be	astounded	by	the	treachery	of	this	call,	which	was exactly	what	Johnny	Fontane	wanted	him	to	feel.
																After	that	he	sat	at	the	desk	and	puffed	at	his	cigar.	There	was	whiskey on	a	side	table	but	he	had	made	some	sort	of	promise	to	himself	and	Hagen	that he	wouldn’t	drink.	He	shouldn’t	even	be	smoking.	It	was	foolish;	whatever	was wrong	with	his	voice	probably	wouldn’t	be	helped	by	knocking	off	drinking	and smoking.	Not	too	much,	but	what	the	hell,	it	might	help	and	he	wanted	all	the
percentages	with	him,	now	that	he	had	a	fighting	chance.
																Now	with	the	house	quiet,	his	divorced	wife	sleeping,	his	beloved daughters	sleeping,	he	could	think	back	to	that	terrible	time	in	his	life	when	he had	deserted	them.	Deserted	them	for	a	whore	tramp	of	a	bitch	who	was	his second	wife.	But	even	now	he	smiled	at	the	thought	of	her,	she	was	such	a	lovely broad	in	so	many	ways	and,	besides,	the	only	thing	that	saved	his	life	was	the day	that	he	had	made	up	his	mind	never	to	hate	a	woman	or,	more	specifically, the	day	he	had	decided	he	could	not	afford	to	hate	his	first	wife	and	his daughters,	his	girl	friends,	his	second	wife,	and	the	girl	friends	after	that,	right	up to	Sharon	Moore	brushing	him	off	so	that	she	could	brag	about	refusing	to	screw for	the	great	Johnny	Fontane.
	
																He	had	traveled	with	the	band	singing	and	then	he	had	become	a	radio star	and	a	star	of	the	movie	stage	shows	and	then	he	had	finally	made	it	in	the movies.	And	in	all	that	time	he	had	lived	the	way	he	wanted	to,	screwed	the women	he	wanted	to,	but	he	had	never	let	it	affect	his	personal	life.	Then	he	had fallen	for	his	soon	to	be	second	wife,	Margot	Ashton;	he	had	gone	absolutely crazy	for	her.	His	career	had	gone	to	hell,	his	voice	had	gone	to	hell,	his	family life	had	gone	to	hell.	And	there	had	come	the	day	when	he	was	left	without anything.
																The	thing	was,	he	had	always	been	generous	and	fair.	He	had	given	his first	wife	everything	he	owned	when	he	divorced	her.	He	had	made	sure	his	two daughters	would	get	a	piece	of	everything	he	made,	every	record,	every	movie, every	club	date.	And	when	he	had	been	rich	and	famous	he	had	refused	his	first wife	nothing.	He	had	helped	out	all	her	brothers	and	sisters,	her	father	and mother,	the	girl	friends	she	had	gone	to	school	with	and	their	families.	He	had never	been	a	stuck-up	celebrity.	He	had	sung	at	the	weddings	of	his	wife’s	two younger	sisters,	something	he	hated	to	do.	He	had	never	refused	her	anything except	the	complete	surrender	of	his	own	personality.
																And	then	when	he	had	touched	bottom,	when	he	could	no	longer	get movie	work,	when	he	could	no	longer	sing,	when	his	second	wife	had	betrayed