hustle	him	because	his	connections	would	help	her	in	show	biz.	She	was	really	a straight	kid.	But	there	was	something	else	he	recognized.	It	had	happened	a	few times	before.	The	girl	who	went	on	a	date	with	her	mind	all	made	up	not	to	go	to bed	with	him,	no	matter	how	much	she	liked	him,	just	so	that	she	could	tell	her friends,	and	even	more,	herself,	that	she	had	turned	down	a	chance	to	screw	for the	great	Johnny	Fontane.	It	was	something	he	understood	now	that	he	was	older and	he	wasn’t	angry.	He	just	didn’t	like	her	quite	that	much	and	he	had	really liked	her	a	lot.
																And	now	that	he	didn’t	like	her	quite	so	much,	he	relaxed	more.	He sipped	his	drink	and	watched	the	Pacific	Ocean.	She	said,	“I	hope	you’re	not sore,	Johnny.	I	guess	I’m	being	square,	I	guess	in	Hollywood	a	girl’s	supposed to	put	out	just	as	casually	as	kissing	a	beau	good	night.	I	just	haven’t	been around	long	enough.”
																Johnny	smiled	at	her	and	patted	her	cheek.	His	hand	fell	down	to	pull her	skirt	discreetly	over	her	rounded	silken	knees.	“I’m	not	sore,”	he	said.	“It’s nice	having	an	old-fashioned	date.”	Not	telling	what	he	felt:	the	relief	at	not having	to	prove	himself	a	great	lover,	not	having	to	live	up	to	his	screened, godlike	image.	Not	having	to	listen	to	the	girl	trying	to	react	as	if	he	really	had lived	up	to	that	image,	making	more	out	of	a	very	simple,	routine	piece	of	ass than	it	really	was.
																They	had	another	drink,	shared	a	few	more	cool	kisses	and	then	she decided	to	go.	Johnny	said	politely,	“Can	I	call	you	for	dinner	some	night?”
																She	played	it	frank	and	honest	to	the	end...I	know	you	don’t	want	to waste	your	time	and	then	get	disappointed,”	she	said.	“Thanks	for	a	wonderful evening.	Someday	I’ll	tell	my	children	I	had	supper	with	the	great	Johnny Fontane	all	alone	in	his	apartment.”
																He	smiled	at	her.	“And	that	you	didn’t	give	in,”	he	said.	They	both laughed.	“They’ll	never	believe	that,”	she	said.	And	then	Johnny,	being	a	little phony	in	his	turn,	said,	“I’ll	give	it	to	you	in	writing,	want	me	to?”	She	shook her	head.	He	continued	on.	“Anybody	doubts	you,	give	me	a	buzz	on	the	phone, I’ll	straighten	them	right	out.	I’ll	tell	them	how	I	chased	you	all	around	the
apartment	but	you	kept	your	honor.	OK?”
																He	had,	finally,	been	a	little	too	cruel	and	he	felt	stricken	at	the	hurt	on her	young	face.	She	understood	that	he	was	telling	her	that	he	hadn’t	tried	too hard.	He	had	taken	the	sweetness	of	her	victory	away	from	her.	Now	she	would feel	that	it	had	been	her	lack	of	charm	or	attractiveness	that	had	made	her	the victor	this	night.	And	being	the	girl	she	was,	when	she	told	the	story	of	how	she resisted	the	great	Johnny	Fontane,	she	would	always	have	to	add	with	a	wry	little smile,	“Of	course,	he	didn’t	try	very	hard.”	So	now	taking	pity	on	her,	he	said, “If	you	ever	feel	real	down,	give	me	a	ring.	OK?	I	don’t	have	to	shack	up	every girl	I	know.”
																“I	will,”	she	said.	She	went	out	the	door.
																He	was	left	with	a	long	evening	before	him.	He	could	have	used	what Jack	Woltz	called	the	“meat	factory,”	the	stable	of	willing	starlets,	but	he	wanted human	companionship.	He	wanted	to	talk	like	a	human	being.	He	thought	of	his first	wife,	Virginia.	Now	that	the	work	on	the	picture	was	finished	he	would have	more	time	for	the	kids.	He	wanted	to	become	part	of	their	life	again.	And he	worried	about	Virginia	too.	She	wasn’t	equipped	to	handle	the	Hollywood sharpies	who	might	come	after	her	just	so	that	they	could	brag	about	having screwed	Johnny	Fontane’s	first	wife.	As	far	as	he	knew,	nobody	could	say	that yet.	Everybody	could	say	it	about	his	second	wife	though,	he	thought	wryly.	He picked	up	the	phone.
																He	recognized	her	voice	immediately	and	that	was	not	surprising.	He had	heard	it	the	first	time	when	he	was	ten	years	old	and	they	had	been	in	4B together.	“Hi,	Ginny,”	he	said,	“You	busy	tonight?	Can	I	come	over	for	a	little while?”
																“All	right,”	she	said.	“The	kids	are	sleeping	though;	I	don’t	want	to wake	them	up.”
																“That’s	OK,”	he	said.	“I	just	wanted	to	talk	to	you.”
																Her	voice	hesitated	slightly,	then	carefully	controlled	not	to	show	any
concern,	she	asked,	“Is	it	anything	serious,	anything	important?”
																“No,”	Johnny	said.	“I	finished	the	picture	today	and	I	thought	maybe	I could	just	see	you	and	talk	to	you.	Maybe	I	could	take	a	look	at	the	kids	if	you’re sure	they	won’t	wake	up.”
																“OK,”	she	said.	“I’m	glad	you	got	that	part	you	wanted.”
																“Thanks,”	he	said.	“I’ll	see	you	in	about	a	half	hour.”
																When	he	got	to	what	had	been	his	home	in	Beverly	Hills,	Johnny Fontane	sat	in	the	car	for	a	moment	staring	at	the	house.	He	remembered	what his	Godfather	had	said,	that	he	could	make	his	own	life	what	he	wanted.	Great chance	if	you	knew	what	you	wanted.	But	what	did	he	want?
																His	first	wife	was	waiting	for	him	at	the	door.	She	was	pretty,	petite and	brunette,	a	nice	Italian	girl,	the	girl	next	door	who	would	never	fool	around with	another	man	and	that	had	been	important	to	him.	Did	he	still	want	her,	he asked	himself,	and	the	answer	was	no.	For	one	thing,	he	could	no	longer	make love	to	her,	their	affection	had	grown	too	old.	And	there	were	some	things, nothing	to	do	with	sex,	she	could	never	forgive	him.	But	they	were	no	longer enemies.
																She	made	him	coffee	and	served	him	homemade	cookies	in	the	living room.	“Stretch	out	on	the	sofa,”	she	said,	“you	look	tired.”	He	took	off	his	jacket and	his	shoes	and	loosened	his	tie	while	she	sat	in	the	chair	opposite	him	with	a grave	little	smile	on	her	face.	“It’s	funny,”	she	said.
																“What’s	funny?”	he	asked	her,	sipping	coffee	and	spilling	some	of	it on	his	shirt.
																“The	great	Johnny	Fontane	stuck	without	a	date,”	she	said.
																“The	great	Johnny	Fontane	is	lucky	if	he	can	even	get	it	up	anymore,” he	said.
																It	was	unusual	for	him	to	be	so	direct.	Ginny	asked,	“Is	there something	really	the	matter?”
																Johnny	grinned	at	her.	“I	had	a	date	with	a	girl	in	my	apartment	and she	brushed	me	off.	And	you	know,	I	was	relieved.”
																To	his	surprise	he	saw	a	look	of	anger	pass	over	Ginny’s	face.	“Don’t worry	about	those	little	tramps,”	she	said.	“She	must	have	thought	that	was	the way	to	get	you	interested	in	her.”	And	Johnny	realized	with	amusement	that Ginny	was	actually	angry	with	the	girl	who	had	turned	him	down.
																“Ah,	what	the	hell,”	he	said.	“I’m	tired	of	that	stuff.	I	have	to	grow	up sometime.	And	now	that	I	can’t	sing	anymore	I	guess	I’ll	have	a	tough	time	with dames.	I	never	got	in	on	my	looks,	you	know.”
																She	said	loyally,	“You	were	always	better	looking	than	you photographed.”
																Johnny	shook	his	head.	“I’m	getting	fat	and	I’m	getting	bald.	Hell,	if this	picture	doesn’t	make	me	big	again	I	better	learn	how	to	bake	pizzas.	Or maybe	we’ll	put	you	in	the	movies,	you	look	great.”
																She	looked	thirty-five.	A	good	thirty-five,	but	thirty-five.	And	out	here in	Hollywood	that	might	as	well	be	a	hundred.	The	young	beautiful	girls thronged	through	the	city	like	lemmings,	lasting	one	year,	some	two.	Some	of them	so	beautiful	they	could	make	a	man’s	heart	almost	stop	beating	until	they opened	their	mouths,	until	the	greedy	hopes	for	success	clouded	the	loveliness	of their	eyes.	Ordinary	women	could	never	hope	to	compete	with	them	on	a physical	level.	And	you	could	talk	all	you	wanted	to	about	charm,	about intelligence,	about	chic,	about	poise,	the	raw	beauty	of	these	girls	overpowered everything	else.	Perhaps	if	there	were	not	so	many	of	them	there	might	be	a chance	for	an	ordinary,	nice-looking	woman.	And	since	Johnny	Fontane	could have	all	of	them,	or	nearly	all	of	them,	Ginny	knew	that	he	was	saying	all	this just	to	flatter	her.	He	had	always	been	nice	that	way.	He	had	always	been	polite to	women	even	at	the	height	of	his	fame,	paying	them	compliments,	holding lights	for	their	cigarettes,	opening	doors.	And	since	all	this	was	usually	done	for
him,	it	made	it	even	more	impressive	to	the	girls	he	went	out	with.	And	he	did	it with	all	girls,	even	the	one-night	stands,	I-don’t-know-your-name	girls.
																She	smiled	at	him,	a	friendly	smile.	“You	already	made	me,	Johnny, remember?	For	twelve	years.	You	don’t	have	to	give	me	your	line.”
																He	sighed	and	stretched	out	on	the	sofa.	“No	kidding,	Ginny,	you	look good.	I	wish	I	looked	that	good.”
																She	didn’t	answer	him.	She	could	see	he	was	depressed.	“Do	you	think the	picture	is	OK?	Will	it	do	you	some	good?”	she	asked.
																Johnny	nodded.	“Yeah.	It	could	bring	me	all	the	way	back.	If	I	get	the Academy	thing	and	play	my	cards	right,	I	can	make	it	big	again	even	without	the singing.	Then	maybe	I	can	give	you	and	the	kids	more	dough.”
																“We	have	more	than	enough,”	Ginny	said.
																“I	wanta	see	more	of	the	kids	too,”	Johnny	said.	“I	want	to	settle	down a	little	bit.	Why	can’t	I	come	every	Friday	night	for	dinner	here?	I	swear	I’ll never	miss	one	Friday,	I	don’t	care	how	far	away	I	am	or	how	busy	I	am.	And then	whenever	I	can	I’ll	spend	weekends	or	maybe	the	kids	can	spend	some	part of	their	vacations	with	me.”
																Ginny	put	an	ashtray	on	his	chest.	“It’s	OK	with	me,”	she	said.	“I never	got	married	because	I	wanted	you	to	keep	being	their	father.”	She	said	this without	any	kind	of	emotion,	but	Johnny	Fontane,	staring	up	at	the	ceiling,	knew she	said	it	as	an	atonement	for	those	other	things,	the	cruel	things	she	had	once said	to	him	when	their	marriage	had	broken	up,	when	his	career	had	started going	down	the	drain.
																“By	the	way,	guess	who	called	me,”	she	said.
																Johnny	wouldn’t	play	that	game,	he	never	did.	“Who?”	he	asked.
																Ginny	said,	“You	could	take	at	least	one	lousy	guess.”	Johnny	didn’t answer.	“Your	Godfather,”	she	said.
																Johnny	was	really	surprised.	“He	never	talks	to	anybody	on	the	phone. What	did	he	say	to	you?”
																“He	told	me	to	help	you,”	Ginny	said.	“He	said	you	could	be	as	big	as you	ever	were,	that	you	were	on	your	way	back,	but	that	you	needed	people	to believe	in	you.	I	asked	him	why	should	I?	And	he	said	because	you’re	the	father of	my	children.	He’s	such	a	sweet	old	guy	and	they	tell	such	horrible	stories about	him.”
																Virginia	hated	phones	and	she	had	had	all	the	extensions	taken	out except	for	the	one	in	her	bedroom	and	one	in	the	kitchen.	Now	they	could	hear the	kitchen	phone	ringing.	She	went	to	answer	it.	When	she	came	back	into	the living	room	there	was	a	look	of	surprise	on	her	face.	“It’s	for	you,	Johnny,”	she said.	“It’s	Tom	Hagen.	He	says	it’s	important.”
																Johnny	went	into	the	kitchen	and	picked	up	the	phone.	“Yeah,	Tom,” he	said.
																Tom	Hagen’s	voice	was	cool.	“Johnny,	the	Godfather	wants	me	to come	out	and	see	you	and	set	some	things	up	that	can	help	you	out	now	that	the picture	is	finished.	He	wants	me	to	catch	the	morning	plane.	Can	you	meet	it	in Los	Angeles?	I	have	to	fly	back	to	New	York	the	same	night	so	you	won’t	have to	worry	about	keeping	your	night	free	for	me.”
																“Sure,	Tom,”	Johnny	said.	“And	don’t	worry	about	me	losing	a	night. Stay	over	and	relax	a	bit.	I’ll	throw	a	party	and	you	can	meet	some	movie people.”	He	always	made	that	offer,	he	didn’t	want	the	folks	from	his	old neighborhood	to	think	he	was	ashamed	of	them.
																“Thanks,”	Hagen	said,	“but	I	really	have	to	catch	the	early	morning plane	back.	OK,	you’ll	meet	the	eleven-thirty	A.M.	out	of	New	York?”
																“Sure,”	Johnny	said.
																“Stay	in	your	car,”	Hagen	said.	“Send	one	of	your	people	to	meet	me when	I	get	off	the	plane	and	bring	me	to	you.”
																“Right,”	Johnny	said.
																He	went	back	to	the	living	room	and	Ginny	looked	at	him	inquiringly. “My	Godfather	has	some	plan	for	me,	to	help	me	out,”	Johnny	said.	“He	got	me the	part	in	the	movie,	I	don’t	know	how.	But	I	wish	he’d	stay	out	of	the	rest	of it.”
																He	went	back	onto	the	sofa.	He	felt	very	tired.	Ginny	said,	“Why	don’t you	sleep	in	the	guest	bedroom	tonight	instead	of	going	home?	You	can	have breakfast	with	the	kids	and	you	won’t	have	to	drive	home	so	late.	I	hate	to	think of	you	all	alone	in	that	house	of	yours	anyway.	Don’t	you	get	lonely?”
																“I	don’t	stay	home	much,”	Johnny	said.
																She	laughed	and	said,	“Then	you	haven’t	changed	much.”	She	paused and	then	said,	“Shall	I	fix	up	the	other	bedroom?”
																Johnny	said,	“Why	can’t	I	sleep	in	your	bedroom?”
																She	flushed.	“No,”	she	said.	She	smiled	at	him	and	he	smiled	back. They	were	still	friends.
																When	Johnny	woke	up	the	next	morning	it	was	late,	he	could	tell	by the	sun	coming	in	through	the	drawn	blinds.	It	never	came	in	that	way	unless	it was	in	the	afternoon.	He	yelled,	“Hey,	Ginny,	do	I	still	rate	breakfast?”	And	far away	he	heard	her	voice	call,	“Just	a	second.”
																And	it	was	just	a	second.	She	must	have	had	everything	ready,	hot	in the	oven,	the	tray	waiting	to	be	loaded,	because	as	Johnny	lit	his	first	cigarette	of the	day,	the	door	of	the	bedroom	opened	and	his	two	small	daughters	came	in wheeling	the	breakfast	cart.
																They	were	so	beautiful	it	broke	his	heart.	Their	faces	were	shining	and clear,	their	eyes	alive	with	curiosity	and	the	eager	desire	to	run	to	him.	They wore	their	hair	braided	old-fashioned	in	long	pigtails	and	they	wore	oldfashioned	frocks	and	white	patent-leather	shoes.	They	stood	by	the	breakfast	cart watching	him	as	he	stubbed	out	his	cigarette	and	waited	for	him	to	call	and	hold his	arms	wide.	Then	they	came	running	to	him.	He	pressed	his	face	between their	two	fresh	fragrant	cheeks	and	scraped	them	with	his	beard	so	that	they shrieked.	Ginny	appeared	in	the	bedroom	door	and	wheeled	the	breakfast	cart the	rest	of	the	way	so	that	he	could	eat	in	bed.	She	sat	beside	him	on	the	edge	of the	bed,	pouring	his	coffee,	buttering	his	toast.	The	two	young	daughters	sat	on the	bedroom	couch	watching	him.	They	were	too	old	now	for	pillow	fights	or	to be	tossed	around.	They	were	already	smoothing	their	mussed	hair.	Oh,	Christ,	he thought,	pretty	soon	they’ll	be	all	grown	up,	Hollywood	punks	will	be	out	after them.
																He	shared	his	toast	and	bacon	with	them	as	he	ate,	gave	them	sips	of coffee.	It	was	a	habit	left	over	from	when	he	had	been	singing	with	the	band	and rarely	ate	with	them	so	they	liked	to	share	his	food	when	he	had	his	odd-hour meals	like	afternoon	breakfasts	or	morning	suppers.	The	change-around	in	food delighted	them--to	eat	steak	and	french	fries	at	seven	in	the	morning,	bacon	and eggs	in	the	afternoon.
																Only	Ginny	and	a	few	of	his	close	friends	knew	how	much	he	idolized his	daughters.	That	had	been	the	worst	thing	about	the	divorce	and	leaving home.	The	one	thing	he	had	fought	about,	and	for,	was	his	position	as	a	father	to them.	In	a	very	sly	way	he	had	made	Ginny	understand	he	would	not	be	pleased by	her	remarrying,	not	because	he	was	jealous	of	her,	but	because	he	was	jealous of	his	position	as	a	father.	He	had	arranged	the	money	to	be	paid	to	her	so	it would	be	enormously	to	her	advantage	financially	not	to	remarry.	It	was understood	that	she	could	have	lovers	as	long	as	they	were	not	introduced	into her	home	life.	But	on	this	score	he	had	absolute	faith	in	her.	She	had	always been	amazingly	shy	and	old-fashioned	in	sex.	The	Hollywood	gigolos	had	batted zero	when	they	started	swarming	around	her,	sniffing	for	the	financial	settlement and	the	favors	they	could	get	from	her	famous	husband.
																He	had	no	fear	that	she	expected	a	reconciliation	because	he	had
wanted	to	sleep	with	her	the	night	before.	Neither	one	of	them	wanted	to	renew their	old	marriage.	She	understood	his	hunger	for	beauty,	his	irresistible	impulse toward	young	women	far	more	beautiful	than	she.	It	was	known	that	he	always slept	with	his	movie	co-stars	at	least	once.	His	boyish	charm	was	irresistible	to them,	as	their	beauty	was	to	him.
																“You’ll	have	to	start	getting	dressed	pretty	soon,”	Ginny	said.	“Tom’s plane	will	be	getting	in.”	She	shooed	the	daughters	out	of	the	room.
																“Yeah,”	Johnny	said.	“By	the	way,	Ginny,	you	know	I’m	getting divorced?	I’m	gonna	be	a	free	man	again.”
																She	watched	him	getting	dressed.	He	always	kept	fresh	clothes	at	her house	ever	since	they	had	come	to	their	new	arrangement	after	the	wedding	of Don	Corleone’s	daughter.	“Christmas	is	only	two	weeks	away,”	she	said.	“Shall I	plan	on	you	being	here?”
																It	was	the	first	time	he	had	even	thought	about	the	holidays.	When	his voice	was	in	shape,	holidays	were	lucrative	singing	dates	but	even	then Christmas	was	sacred.	If	he	missed	this	one,	it	would	be	the	second	one.	Last year	he	had	been	courting	his	second	wife	in	Spain,	trying	to	get	her	to	marry him.
																“Yeah,”	he	said.	“Christmas	Eve	and	Christmas.”	He	didn’t	mention New	Year’s	Eve.	That	would	be	one	of	the	wild	nights	he	needed	every	once	in	a while,	to	get	drunk	with	his	friends,	and	he	didn’t	want	a	wife	along	then.	He didn’t	feel	guilty	about	it.
																She	helped	him	put	on	his	jacket	and	brushed	it	off.	He	was	always fastidiously	neat.	She	could	see	him	frowning	because	the	shirt	he	had	put	on was	not	laundered	to	his	taste,	the	cuff	links,	a	pair	he	had	not	worn	for	some time,	were	a	little	too	loud	for	the	way	he	liked	to	dress	now.	She	laughed	softly and	said,	“Tom	won’t	notice	the	difference.”
																The	three	women	of	the	family	walked	him	to	the	door	and	out	on	the driveway	to	his	car.	The	two	little	girls	held	his	hands,	one	on	each	side.	His
wife	walked	a	little	behind	him.	She	was	getting	pleasure	out	of	how	happy	he looked.	When	he	reached	his	car	he	turned	around	and	swung	each	girl	in	turn high	up	in	the	air	and	kissed	her	on	the	way	down.	Then	he	kissed	his	wife	and got	into	the	car.	He	never	liked	drawn-out	good-byes.
	
																Arrangements	had	been	made	by	his	PR	man	and	aide.	At	his	house	a chauffeured	car	was	waiting,	a	rented	car.	In	it	were	the	PR	man	and	another member	of	his	entourage.	Johnny	parked	his	car	and	hopped	in	and	they	were	on their	way	to	the	airport.	He	waited	inside	the	car	while	the	PR	man	went	out	to meet	Tom	Hagen’s	plane.	When	Tom	got	into	the	car	they	shook	hands	and drove	back	to	his	house.
																Finally	he	and	Tom	were	alone	in	the	living	room.	There	was	a coolness	between	them.	Johnny	had	never	forgiven	Hagen	for	acting	as	a	barrier to	his	getting	in	touch	with	the	Don	when	the	Don	was	angry	with	him,	in	those bad	days	before	Connie’s	wedding.	Hagen	never	made	excuses	for	his	actions. He	could	not.	It	was	part	of	his	job	to	act	as	a	lightning	rod	for	resentments which	people	were	too	awed	to	feel	toward	the	Don	himself	though	he	had earned	them.
																“Your	Godfather	sent	me	out	here	to	give	you	a	hand	on	some	things,” Hagen	said.	“I	wanted	to	get	it	out	of	the	way	before	Christmas.”
																Johnny	Fontane	shrugged.	“The	picture	is	finished.	The	director	was	a square	guy	and	treated	me	right.	My	scenes	are	too	important	to	be	left	on	the cutting-room	floor	just	for	Woltz	to	pay	me	off.	He	can’t	ruin	a	ten-milliondollar	picture.	So	now	everything	depends	on	how	good	people	think	I	am	in	the movie.”
																Hagen	said	cautiously,	“Is	winning	this	Academy	Award	so	terribly important	to	an	actor’s	career,	or	is	it	just	the	usual	publicity	crap	that	really doesn’t	mean	anything	one	way	or	the	other?”	He	paused	and	added	hastily, “Except	of	course	the	glory,	everybody	likes	glory.”