him,	he	had	gone	to	spend	a	few	days	with	Ginny	and	his	daughters.	He	had more	or	less	flung	himself	on	her	mercy	one	night	because	he	felt	so	lousy.	That day	he	had	heard	one	of	his	recordings	and	he	had	sounded	so	terrible	that	he accused	the	sound	technicians	of	sabotaging	the	record.	Until	finally	he	had become	convinced	that	that	was	what	his	voice	really	sounded	like.	He	had smashed	the	master	record	and	refused	to	sing	anymore.	He	was	so	ashamed	that he	had	not	sung	a	note	except	with	Nino	at	Connie	Corleone’s	wedding.
																He	had	never	forgotten	the	look	on	Ginny’s	face	when	she	found	out about	all	his	misfortunes.	It	had	passed	over	her	face	only	for	a	second	but	that was	enough	for	him	never	to	forget	it.	It	was	a	look	of	savage	and	joyful satisfaction.	It	was	a	look	that	could	only	make	him	believe	that	she	had contemptuously	hated	him	all	these	years.	She	quickly	recovered	and	offered him	cool	but	polite	sympathy.	He	had	pretended	to	accept	it.	During	the	next	few days	he	had	gone	to	see	three	of	the	girls	he	had	liked	the	most	over	the	years, girls	he	had	remained	friends	with	and	sometimes	still	slept	with	in	a	comradely way,	girls	that	he	had	done	everything	in	his	power	to	help,	girls	to	whom	he	had given	the	equivalent	of	hundreds	of	thousands	of	dollars	in	gifts	or	job opportunities.	On	their	faces	he	had	caught	that	same	fleeting	look	of	savage satisfaction.
																It	was	during	that	time	that	he	knew	he	had	to	make	a	decision.	He could	become	like	a	great	many	other	men	in	Hollywood,	successful	producers, writers,	directors,	actors,	who	preyed	on	beautiful	women	with	lustful	hatred.	He could	use	power	and	monetary	favors	grudgingly,	always	alert	for	treason, always	believing	that	women	would	betray	and	desert	him,	adversaries	to	be bested.	Or	he	could	refuse	to	hate	women	and	continue	to	believe	in	them.
																He	knew	he	could	not	afford	not	to	love	them,	that	something	of	his spirit	would	die	if	he	did	not	continue	to	love	women	no	matter	how	treacherous and	unfaithful	they	were.	It	didn’t	matter	that	the	women	he	loved	most	in	the world	were	secretly	glad	to	see	him	crushed,	humiliated,	by	a	wayward	fortune; it	did	not	matter	that	in	the	most	awful	way,	not	sexually,	they	had	been unfaithful	to	him.	He	had	no	choice.	He	had	to	accept	them.	And	so	he	made love	to	all	of	them,	gave	them	presents,	hid	the	hurt	their	enjoyment	of	his misfortunes	gave	him.	He	forgave	them	knowing	he	was	being	paid	back	for
having	lived	in	the	utmost	ÿ4kUdom	from	women	and	in	the	fullest	flush	of	their favor.	But	now	he	never	felt	guilty	about	being	untrue	to	them.	He	never	felt guilty	about	how	he	treated	Ginny,	insisting	on	remaining	the	sole	father	of	his children,	yet	never	even	considering	remarrying	her,	and	letting	her	know	that too.	That	was	one	thing	he	had	salvaged	out	of	his	fall	from	the	top.	He	had grown	a	thick	skin	about	the	hurts	he	gave	women.
																He	was	tired	and	ready	for	bed	but	one	note	of	memory	stuck	with him:	singing	with	Nino	Valenti.	And	suddenly	he	knew	what	would	please	Don Corleone	more	than	anything	else.	He	picked	up	the	phone	and	told	the	operator to	get	him	New	York.	He	called	Sonny	Corleone	and	asked	him	for	Nino Valenti’s	number.	Then	he	called	Nino.	Nino	sounded	a	little	drunk	as	usual.
																“Hey,	Nino,	how’d	you	like	to	come	out	here	and	work	for	me,” Johnny	said.	“I	need	a	guy	I	can	trust.”
																Nino,	kidding	around,	said,	“Gee,	I	don’t	know,	Johnny,	I	got	a	good job	on	the	truck,	boffing	housewives	along	my	route,	picking	up	a	clear	hundredfifty	every	week.	What	you	got	to	offer?”
																“I	can	start	you	at	five	hundred	and	get	you	blind	dates	with	movie stars,	how’s	that?”	Johnny	said.”	And	maybe	I’ll	let	you	sing	at	my	parties.”
																“Yeah,	OK,	let	me	think	about	it.”	Nino	said.	“Let	me	talk	it	over	with my	lawyer	and	my	accountant	and	my	helper	on	the	truck.”
																“Hey,	no	kidding	around,	Nino,”	Johnny	said.	“I	need	you	out	here.	I want	you	to	fly	out	tomorrow	morning	and	sign	a	personal	contract	for	five hundred	a	week	for	a	year.	Then	if	you	steal	one	of	my	broads	and	I	fire	you, you	pick	up	at	least	a	year’s	salary.	OK?”
																There	was	a	long	pause.	Nino’s	voice	was	sober.	“Hey,	Johnny,	you kidding?”
																Johnny	said,	“I’m	serious,	kid.	Go	to	my	agent’s	office	in	New	York. They’ll	have	your	plane	ticket	and	some	cash.	I’m	gonna	call	them	first	thing	in
the	morning.	So	you	go	up	there	in	the	afternoon.	OK?	Then	I’ll	have	somebody meet	you	at	the	plane	and	bring	you	out	to	the	house.”
																Again	there	was	a	long	pause	and	then	Nino’s	voice,	very	subdued, uncertain,	said,	“OK,	Johnny.”	He	didn’t	sound	drunk	anymore.
																Johnny	hung	up	the	phone	and	got	ready	for	bed.	He	felt	better	than any	time	since	he	had	smashed	that	master	record.
	
Chapter	13
	
																Johnny	Fontane	sat	in	the	huge	recording	studio	and	figured	costs	on	a yellow	pad.	Musicians	were	filing	in,	all	of	them	friends	he	had	known	since	he was	a	kid	singer	with	the	bands.	The	conductor,	top	man	in	the	business	of	pop accompaniment	and	a	man	who	had	been	kind	to	him	when	things	went	sour, was	giving	each	musician	bundles	of	music	and	verbal	instructions.	His	name was	Eddie	Neils.	He	had	taken	on	this	recording	as	a	favor	to	Johnny,	though	his schedule	was	crowded.
																Nino	Valenti	was	sitting	at	a	piano	fooling	around	nervously	with	the keys.	He	was	also	sipping	from	a	huge	glass	of	rye.	Johnny	didn’t	mind	that.	He knew	Nino	sang	just	as	well	drunk	as	sober	and	what	they	were	doing	today wouldn’t	require	any	real	musicianship	on	Nino’s	part.
																Eddie	Neils	had	made	special	arrangements	of	some	old	Italian	and Sicilian	songs,	and	a	special	job	on	the	duel-duet	song	that	Nino	and	Johnny	had sung	at	Connie	Corleone’s	wedding.	Johnny	was	making	the	record	primarily because	he	knew	that	the	Don	loved	such	songs	and	it	would	be	a	perfect Christmas	gift	for	him.	He	also	had	a	hunch	that	the	record	would	sell	in	the	high numbers,	not	a	million,	of	course.	And	he	had	figured	out	that	helping	Nino	was how	the	Don	wanted	his	payoff.	Nino	was,	after	all,	another	one	of	the	Don’s godchildren.
																Johnny	put	his	clipboard	and	yellow	pad	on	the	folding	chair	beside him	and	got	up	to	stand	beside	the	piano.	He	said,	“Hey,	paisan,”	and	Nino glanced	up	and	tried	to	smile.	He	looked	a	little	sick.	Johnny	leaned	over	and rubbed	his	shoulder	blades.	“Relax,	kid,”	he	said.	“Do	a	good	job	today	and	I’ll fix	you	up	with	the	best	and	most	famous	piece	of	ass	in	Hollywood.”
																Nino	took	a	gulp	of	whiskey.	“Who’s	that,	Lassie?”
																Johnny	laughed.	“No,	Deanna	Dunn.	I	guarantee	the	goods.”
																Nino	was	impressed	but	couldn’t	help	saying	with	pseudohopefulness,	“You	can’t	get	me	Lassie?”
																The	orchestra	swung	into	the	opening	song	of	the	medley.	Johnny Fontane	listened	intently.	Eddie	Neils	would	play	all	the	songs	through	in	their special	arrangements.	Then	would	come	the	first	take	for	the	record.	As	Johnny listened	he	made	mental	notes	on	exactly	how	he	would	handle	each	phrase,	how he	would	come	into	each	song.	He	knew	his	voice	wouldn’t	last	long,	but	Nino would	be	doing	most	of	the	singing,	Johnny	would	be	singing	under	him.	Except of	course	in	the	duet-duel	song.	He	would	have	to	save	himself	for	that.
																He	pulled	Nino	to	his	feet	and	they	both	stood	by	their	microphones. Nino	flubbed	the	opening,	flubbed	it	again.	His	face	was	beginning	to	get	red with	embarrassment.	Johnny	kidded	him,	“Hey,	you	stalling	for	overtime?”
																“I	don’t	feel	natural	without	my	mandolin,”	Nino	said.
																Johnny	thought	that	over	for	a	moment.	“Hold	that	glass	of	booze	in your	hand,”	he	said.
																It	seemed	to	do	the	trick.	Nino	kept	drinking	from	the	glass	as	he	sang but	he	was	doing	fine.	Johnny	sang	easily,	not	straining,	his	voice	merely dancing	around	Nino’s	main	melody.	There	was	no	emotional	satisfaction	in	this kind	of	singing	but	he	was	amazed	at	his	own	technical	skill.	Ten	years	of vocalizing	had	taught	him	something.
																When	they	came	to	the	duet-duel	song	that	ended	the	record,	Johnny let	his	voice	go	and	when	they	finished	his	vocal	cords	ached.	The	musicians	had been	carried	away	by	the	last	song,	a	rare	thing	for	these	calloused	veterans. They	hammered	down	their	instruments	and	stamped	their	feet	in	approval	as applause.	The	drummer	gave	them	a	ruffle	of	drums.
																With	stops	and	conferences	they	worked	nearly	four	hours	before	they quit.	Eddie	Neils	came	over	to	Johnny	and	said	quietly,	“You	sounded	pretty good,	kid.	Maybe	you’re	ready	to	do	a	record.	I	have	a	new	song	that’s	perfect for	you.”
																Johnny	shook	his	head.	“Come	on,	Eddie,	don’t	kid	me.	Besides,	in	a couple	of	hours	I’ll	be	too	hoarse	to	even	talk.	Do	you	think	we’ll	have	to	fix	up much	of	the	stuff	we	did	today?”
																Eddie	said	thoughtfully,	“Nino	will	have	to_ìðwe	into	the	studio tomorrow.	He	made	some	mistakes.	But	he’s	much	better	than	I	thought	he would	be.	As	for	your	stuff,	I’ll	have	the	sound	engineers	fix	anything	I	don’t like.	OK?”
																“OK,”	Johnny	said.	“When	can	I	hear	the	pressing?”
																“Tomorrow	night,”	Eddie	Neils	said.	“Your	place?”
																“Yeah,”	Johnny	said.	“Thanks,	Eddie.	See	you	tomorrow.”	He	took Nino	by	the	arm	and	walked	out	of	the	studio.	They	went	to	his	house	instead	of Ginny’s.
																By	this	time	it	was	late	afternoon.	Nino	was	still	more	than	half-drunk. Johnny	told	him	to	get	under	the	shower	and	then	take	a	snooze.	They	had	to	be at	a	big	party	at	eleven	that	night.
																When	Nino	woke	up,	Johnny	briefed	him.	“This	party	is	a	movie	star Lonely	Hearts	Club,”	he	said.	“These	broads	tonight	are	dames	you’ve	seen	in the	movies	as	glamour	queens	millions	of	guys	would	give	their	right	arms	to screw.	And	the	only	reason	they’ll	be	at	the	party	tonight	is	to	find	somebody	to
shack	them	up.	Do	you	know	why?	Because	they	are	hungry	for	it,	they	are	just a	little	old.	And	just	like	every	dame,	they	want	it	with	a	little	bit	of	class.”
																“What’s	the	matter	with	your	voice?	Nino	asked.
																Johnny	had	been	speaking	almost	in	a	whisper.	“Every	time	after	I sing	a	little	bit	that	happens.	I	won’t	be	able	to	sing	for	a	month	now.	But	I’ll	get over	the	hoarseness	in	a	couple	of	days.”
																Nino	said	thoughtfully,	“Tough,	huh?”
																Johnny	shrugged.	“Listen,	Nino,	don’t	get	too	drunk	tonight.	You	have to	show	these	Hollywood	broads	that	my	paisan	buddy	ain’t	weak	in	the	poop. You	gotta	come	across.	Remember,	some	of	these	dames	are	very	powerful	in movies,	they	can	get	you	work.	It	doesn’t	hurt	to	be	charming	after	you	knock off	a	piece.”
																Nino	was	already	pouring	himself	a	drink.	“I’m	always	charming,”	he said.	He	drained	the	glass.	Grinning,	he	asked,	“No	kidding,	can	you	really	get me	close	to	Deanna	Dunn?”
																“Don’t	be	so	anxious,”	Johnny	said.	“It’s	not	going	to	be	like	you think.”
	
																The	Hollywood	Movie	Star	Lonely	Hearts	Club	(so	called	by	the young	juvenile	leads	whose	attendance	was	mandatory)	met	every	Friday	night at	the	palatial,	studio-owned	home	of	Roy	McElroy,	press	agent	or	rather	public relations	counsel	for	the	Woltz	International	Film	Corporation.	Actually,	though it	was	McElroy’s	open	house	party,	the	idea	had	come	from	the	practical	brain	of Jack	Woltz	himself.	Some	of	his	money-making	movie	stars	were	getting	older now.	Without	the	help	of	special	lights	and	genius	makeup	men	they	looked	their age.	They	were	having	problems.	They	had	also	become,	to	some	extent, desensitized	physically	and	mentally.	They	could	no	longer	“fall	in	love.”	They could	no	longer	assume	the	role	of	hunted	women.	They	had	been	made	too
imperious;	by	money,	by	fame,	by	their	former	beauty.	Woltz	gave	his	parties	so that	it	would	be	easier	for	them	to	pick	up	lovers,	one-night	stands,	who,	if	they had	the	stuff,	could	graduate	into	full-time	bed	partners	and	so	work	their	way upward.	Since	the	action	sometimes	degenerated	into	brawls	or	sexual	excess that	led	to	trouble	with	the	police,	Woltz	decided	to	hold	the	parties	in	the	house of	the	public	relations	counselor,	who	would	be	right	there	to	fix	things	up, payoff	newsmen	and	police	officers	and	keep	everything	quiet.
																For	certain	virile	young	male	actors	on	the	studio	payroll	who	had	not yet	achieved	stardom	or	featured	roles,	attendance	at	the	Friday	night	parties	was not	always	pleasant	duty.	This	was	explained	by	the	fact	that	a	new	film	yet	to be	released	by	the	studio	would	be	shown	at	the	party.	In	fact	that	was	the excuse	for	the	party	itself.	People	would	say,	“Let’s	go	over	to	see	what	the	new picture	so	and	so	made	is	like.”	And	so	it	was	put	in	a	professional	context.
																Young	female	starlets	were	forbidden	to	attend	the	Friday	night parties.	Or	rather	discouraged.	Most	of	them	took	the	hint.
																Screenings	of	the	new	movies	took	place	at	midnight	and	Johnny	and Nino	arrived	at	eleven.	Roy	McElroy	proved	to	be,	at	first	sight,	an	enormously likable	man,	well-groomed,	beautifully	dressed.	He	greeted	Johnny	Fontane	with a	surprised	cry	of	delight.	“What	the	hell	are	you	doing	here?”	he	said	with genuine	astonishment.
																Johnny	shook	his	hand.	“I’m	showing	my	country	cousin	the	sights. Meet	Nino.”
																McElroy	shook	hands	with	Nino	and	gazed	at	him	appraisingly. “They’ll	eat	him	up	alive,”	he	said	to	Johnny.	He	led	them	to	the	rear	patio.
																The	rear	patio	was	really	a	series	of	huge	rooms	whose	glass	doors	had been	opened	to	a	garden	and	pool.	There	were	almost	a	hundred	people	milling around,	all	with	drinks	in	their	hands.	The	patio	lighting	was	artfully	arranged	to flatter	feminine	faces	and	skin.	These	were	women	Nino	had	seen	on	the darkened	movie	screens	when	he	had	been	a	teenager.	They	had	played	their	part in	his	erotic	dreams	of	adolescence.	But	seeing	them	now	in	the	flesh	was	like
seeing	them	in	some	horrible	makeup.	Nothing	could	hide	the	tiredness	of	their spirit	and	their	flesh;	time	had	eroded	their	godhead.	They	posed	and	moved	as charmingly	as	he	remembered	but	they	were	like	wax	fruit,	they	could	not lubricate	his	glands.	Nino	took	two	drinks,	wandered	to	a	table	where	he	could stand	next	to	a	nest	of	bottles.	Johnny	moved	with	him.	They	drank	together until	behind	them	came	the	magic	voice	of	Deanna	Dunn.
																Nino,	like	millions	of	other	men,	had	that	voice	imprinted	on	his	brain forever.	Deanna	Dunn	had	won	two	Academy	Awards,	had	been	in	the	biggest movie	grosser	made	in	Hollywood.	On	the	screen	she	had	a	feline	feminine charm	that	made	her	irresistible	to	all	men.	But	the	words	she	was	saying	had never	been	heard	on	the	silver	screen.	“Johnny,	you	bastard,	I	had	to	go	to	my psychiatrist	again	because	you	gave	me	a	one-night	stand.	How	come	you	never came	back	for	seconds?”
																Johnny	kissed	her	on	her	proffered	cheek.	“You	wore	me	out	for	a month,”	he	said.	“I	want	you	to	meet	my	cousin	Nino.	A	nice	strong	Italian	boy. Maybe	he	can	keep	up	with	you.”
																Deanna	Dunn	turned	to	give	Nino	a	cool	look.	“Does	he	like	to	watch previews?”
																Johnny	laughed.	“I	don’t	think	he’s	ever	had	the	chance.	Why	don’t you	break	him	in?”
																Nino	had	to	take	a	big	drink	when	he	was	alone	with	Deanna	Dunn. He	was	trying	to	be	nonchalant	but	it	was	hard.	Deanna	Dunn	had	the	upturned nose,	the	clean-cut	classical	features	of	the	Anglo-Saxon	beauty.	And	he	knew her	so	well.	He	had	seen	her	alone	in	a	bedroom,	heartbroken,	weeping	over	her dead	flier	husband	who	had	left	her	with	fatherless	children.	He	had	seen	her angry,	hurt,	humiliated,	yet	with	a	shining	dignity	when	a	caddish	Clark	Gable had	taken	advantage	of	her,	then	left	her	for	a	sexpot.	(Deanna	Dunn	never played	sexpots	in	the	movies.)	He	had	seen	her	flushed	with	requited	love, writhing	in	the	embrace	of	the	man	she	adored	and	he	had	seen	her	die beautifully	at	least	a	half	dozen	times.	He	had	seen	her	and	heard	her	and dreamed	about	her	and	yet	he	was	not	prepared	for	the	first	thing	she	said	to	him
alone.
																“Johnny	is	one	of	the	few	men	with	balls	in	this	town,”	she	said.	“The rest	are	all	fags	and	sick	morons	who	couldn’t	get	it	up	with	a	broad	if	you pumped	a	truckload	of	Spanish	fly	into	their	scrotums.”	She	took	Nino	by	the hand	and	led	him	into	a	corner	of	the	room,	out	of	traffic	and	out	of	competition.
																Then	still	coolly	charming,	she	asked	him	about	himself.	He	saw through	her.	He	saw	that	she	was	playing	the	role	of	the	rich	society	girl	who	is being	kind	to	the	stable	boy	or	the	chauffeur,	but	who	in	the	movie	would	either discourage	his	amatory	interest	(if	the	part	were	played	by	Spencer	Tracy),	or throw	up	everything	in	her	mad	desire	for	him	(if	the	part	were	played	by	Clark Gable).	But	it	didn’t	matter.	He	found	himself	telling	her	about	how	he	and Johnny	had	grown	up	together	in	New	York,	about	how	he	and	Johnny	had	sung together	on	little	club	dates.	He	found	her	marvelously	sympathetic	and interested.	Once	she	asked	casually,	“Do	you	know	how	Johnny	made	that bastard	Jack	Woltz	give	him	the	part?”	Nino	froze	and	shook	his	head.	She didn’t	pursue	it.
																The	time	had	come	to	see	the	preview	of	a	new	Woltz	movie.	Deanna Dunn	led	Nino,	her	warm	hand	imprisoning	his,	to	an	interior	room	of	the mansion	that	had	no	windows	but	was	furnished	with	about	fifty	small	twoperson	couches	scattered	around	in	such	a	way	as	to	give	each	one	a	little	island of	semiprivacy.
																Nino	saw	there	was	a	small	table	beside	the	couch	and	on	the	table were	an	ice	bowl,	glasses	and	bottles	of	liquor	plus	a	tray	of	cigarettes.	He	gave Deanna	Dunn	a	cigarette,	lit	it	and	then	mixed	them	both	drinks.	They	didn’t speak	to	each	other.	After	a	few	minutes	the	lights	went	out.
																He	had	been	expecting	something	outrageous.	After	all,	he	had	heard the	legends	of	Hollywood	depravity.	But	he	was	not	quite	prepared	for	Deanna Dunn’s	voracious	plummet	on	his	sexual	organ	without	even	a	courteous	and friendly	word	of	preparation.	He	kept	sipping	his	drink	and	watching	the	movie, but	not	tasting,	not	seeing.	He	was	excited	in	a	way	he	had	never	been	before	but part	of	it	was	because	this	woman	servicing	him	in	the	dark	had	been	the	object
of	his	adolescent	dreams.
																Yet	in	a	way	his	masculinity	was	insulted.	So	when	the	world-famous Deanna	Dunn	was	sated	and	had	tidied	him	up,	he	very	coolly	fixed	her	a	fresh drink	in	the	darkness	and	lit	her	a	fresh	cigarette	and	said	in	the	most	relaxed voice	imaginable,	“This	looks	like	a	pretty	good	movie.”
																He	felt	her	stiffen	beside	him	on	the	couch.	Could	it	be	she	was waiting	for	some	sort	of	compliment?	Nino	poured	his	glass	full	from	the	nearest bottle	his	hand	touched	in	the	darkness.	The	hell	with	that.	She’d	treated	him	like a	goddamn	male	whore.	For	some	reason	now	he	felt	a	cold	anger	at	all	these women.	They	watched	the	picture	for	another	fifteen	minutes.	He	leaned	away from	her	so	their	bodies	did	not	touch.
																Finally	she	said	in	a	low	harsh	whisper,	“Don’t	be	such	a	snotty	punk, you	liked	it.	You	were	as	big	as	a	house.”
																Nino	sipped	his	drink	and	said	in	his	natural	off-hand	manner,	“That’s the	way	it	always	is.	You	should	see	it	when	I	get	excited.”
																She	laughed	a	little	and	kept	quiet	for	the	rest	of	the	picture.	Finally	it was	over	and	the	lights	went	on.	Nino	took	a	look	around.	He	could	see	there had	been	a	ball	here	in	the	darkness	though	oddly	enough	he	hadn’t	heard	a thing.	But	some	of	the	dames	had	that	hard,	shiny,	bright-eyed	look	of	women who	had	just	been	worked	over	real	good.	They	sauntered	out	of	the	projection room.	Deanna	Dunn	left	him	immediately	to	go	over	and	talk	to	an	older	man Nino	recognized	as	a	famous	featured	player,	only	now,	seeing	the	guy	in person,	he	realized	that	he	was	a	fag.	He	sipped	his	drink	thoughtfully.
																Johnny	Fontane	came	up	beside	him	and	said,	“Hi,	old	buddy,	having a	good	time?”
																Nino	grinned.	“I	don’t	know.	It’s	different.	Now	when	I	go	back	to	the old	neighborhood	I	can	say	Deanna	Dunn	had	me.”
																Johnny	laughed.	“She	can	be	better	than	that	if	she	invites	you	home