pocket	and	put	it	inside	his	shirt.	Then	he	walked	across	the	street	into	the	loft building,	through	that	into	the	yard	and	climbed	the	fire	escape	to	the	roof.	From there	he	surveyed	the	street.	Fanucci’s	body	was	still	lying	in	the	doorway	but there	was	no	sign	of	any	other	person.	Two	windows	had	gone	up	in	the tenement	and	he	could	see	dark	heads	poked	out	but	since	he	could	not	see	their features	they	had	certainly	not	seen	his.	And	such	men	would	not	give information	to	the	police.	Fanucci	might	lie	there	until	dawn	or	until	a	patrolman making	the	rounds	stumbled	on	his	body.	No	person	in	that	house	would deliberately	expose	himself	to	police	suspicion	or	questioning.	They	would	lock their	doors	and	pretend	they	had	heard	nothing.
																He	could	take	his	time.	He	traveled	over	the	rooftops	to	his	own	roof door	and	down	to	his	own	flat.	He	unlocked	the	door,	went	inside	and	then locked	the	door	behind	him.	He	rifled	the	dead	man’s	wallet.	Besides	the	seven hundred	dollars	he	had	given	Fanucci	there	were	only	some	singles	and	a	fivedollar	note.
																Tucked	inside	the	flap	was	an	old	five-dollar	gold	piece,	probably	a luck	token.	If	Fanucci	was	a	rich	gangster,	he	certainly	did	not	carry	his	wealth with	him.	This	confirmed	some	of	Vito’s	suspicions.
																He	knew	he	had	to	get	rid	of	the	wallet	and	the	gun	(knowing	enough even	then	that	he	must	leave	the	gold	piece	in	the	wallet).	He	went	up	on	the	roof again	and	traveled	over	a	few	ledges.	He	threw	the	wallet	down	one	air	shaft	and then	he	emptied	the	gun	of	bullets	and	smashed	its	barrel	against	the	roof	ledge. The	barrel	wouldn’t	break.	He	reversed	it	in	his	hand	and	smashed	the	butt against	the	side	of	a	chimney.	The	butt	split	into	two	halves.	He	smashed	it	again and	the	pistol	broke	into	barrel	and	handle,	two	separate	pieces.	He	used	a separate	air	shaft	for	each.	They	made	no	sound	when	they	struck	the	earth	five stories	below,	but	sank	into	the	soft	hill	of	garbage	that	had	accumulated	there. In	the	morning	more	garbage	would	be	thrown	out	of	the	windows	and,	with luck,	would	cover	everything.	Vito	returned	to	his	apartment.
																He	was	trembling	a	little	but	was	absolutely	under	control.	He	changed his	clothes	and	fearful	that	some	blood	might	have	splattered	on	them,	he	threw them	into	a	metal	tub	his	wife	used	for	washing.	He	took	lye	and	heavy	brown
laundry	soap	to	soak	the	clothes	and	scrubbed	them	with	the	metal	wash	board beneath	the	sink.	Then	he	scoured	tub	and	sink	with	lye	and	soap.	He	found	a bundle	of	newly	washed	clothes	in	the	corner	of	the	bedroom	and	mingled	his own	clothes	with	these.	Then	he	put	on	a	fresh	shirt	and	trousers	and	went	down to	join	his	wife	and	children	and	neighbors	in	front	of	the	tenement.
																All	these	precautions	proved	to	be	unnecessary.	The	police,	after discovering	the	dead	body	at	dawn,	never	questioned	Vito	Corleone.	Indeed	he was	astonished	that	they	never	learned	about	Fanucci’s	visit	to	his	home	on	the night	he	was	shot	to	death.	He	had	counted	on	that	for	an	alibi,	Fanucci	leaving the	tenement	alive.	He	only	learned	later	that	the	police	had	been	delighted	with the	murder	of	Fanucci	and	not	too	anxious	to	pursue	his	killers.	They	had assumed	it	was	another	gang	execution,	and	had	questioned	hoodlums	with records	in	the	rackets	and	a	history	of	strong-arm.	Since	Vito	had	never	been	in trouble	he	never	came	into	the	picture.
																But	if	he	had	outwitted	the	police,	his	partners	were	another	matter. Pete	Clemenza	and	Tessio	avoided	him	for	the	next	week,	for	the	next	two weeks,	then	they	came	to	call	on	him	one	evening.	They	came	with	obvious respect.	Vito	Corleone	greeted	them	with	impassive	courtesy	and	served	them wine.
																Clemenza	spoke	first.	He	said	softly,	“Nobody	is	collecting	from	the store	owners	on	Ninth	Avenue.	Nobody	is	collecting	from	the	card	games	and gambling	in	the	neighborhood.”
																Vito	Corleone	gazed	at	both	men	steadily	but	did	not	reply.	Tessio spoke.	“We	could	take	over	Fanucci’s	customers.	They	would	pay	us.”
																Vito	Corleone	shrugged.	“Why	come	to	me?	I	have	no	interest	in	such things.”
																Clemenza	laughed.	Even	in	his	youth,	before	growing	his	enormous belly,	he	had	a	fat	man’s	laugh.	He	said	now	to	Vito	Corleone,	“How	about	that gun	I	gave	you	for	the	truck	job?	Since	you	won’t	need	it	any	more	you	can	give it	back	to	me.”
																Very	slowly	and	deliberately	Vito	Corleone	took	a	wad	of	bills	out	of his	side	pocket	and	peeled	off	five	tens.	“Here,	I’ll	pay	you.	I	threw	the	gun away	after	the	truck	job.”	He	smiled	at	the	two	men.
																At	that	time	Vito	Corleone	did	not	know	the	effect	of	this	smile.	It	was chilling	because	it	attempted	no	menace.	He	smiled	as	if	it	was	some	private joke	only	he	himself	could	appreciate.	But	since	he	smiled	in	that	fashion	only	in affairs	that	were	lethal,	and	since	the	joke	was	not	really	private	and	since	his eyes	did	not	smile,	and	since	his	outward	character	was	usually	so	reasonable and	quiet,	the	sudden	unmasking	of	his	true	self	was	frightening.
																Clemenza	shook	his	head.	“I	don’t	want	the	money,”	he	said.	Vito pocketed	the	bills.	He	waited.	They	all	understood	each	other.	They	knew	he	had killed	Fanucci	and	though	they	never	spoke	about	it	to	anyone	the	whole neighborhood,	within	a	few	weeks,	also	knew.	Vito	Corleone	was	treated	as	a “man	of	respect”	by	everyone.	But	he	made	no	attempt	to	take	over	the	Fanucci rackets	and	tributes.
																What	followed	then	was	inevitable.	One	night	Vito’s	wife	brought	a neighbor,	a	widow,	to	the	flat.	The	woman	was	Italian	and	of	unimpeachable character.	She	worked	hard	to	keep	a	home	for	her	fatherless	children.	Her sixteen-year-old	son	brought	home	his	pay	envelope	sealed,	to	hand	over	to	her in	the	old-country	style;	her	seventeen-year-old	daughter,	a	dressmaker,	did	the same.	The	whole	family	sewed	buttons	on	cards	at	night	at	slave	labor	piece rates.	The	woman’s	name	was	Signora	Colombo.
																Vito	Corleone’s	wife	said,	“The	Signora	has	a	favor	to	ask	of	you.	She is	having	some	trouble.”
																Vito	Corleone	expected	to	be	asked	for	money,	which	he	was	ready	to give.	But	it	seemed	that	Mrs.	Colombo	owned	a	dog	which	her	youngest	son adored.	The	landlord	had	received	complaints	on	the	dog	barking	at	night	and had	told	Mrs.	Colombo	to	get	rid	of	it.	She	had	pretended	to	do	so.	The	landlord had	found	out	that	she	had	deceived	him	and	had	ordered	her	to	vacate	her apartment.	She	had	promised	this	time	to	truly	get	rid	of	the	dog	and	she	had done	so.	But	the	landlord	was	so	angry	that	he	would	not	revoke	his	order.	She
had	to	get	out	or	the	police	would	be	summoned	to	put	her	out.	And	her	poor little	boy	had	cried	so	when	they	had	given	the	dog	away	to	relatives	who	lived in	Long	Island.	All	for	nothing,	they	would	lose	their	home.
																Vito	Corleone	asked	her	gently,	“Why	do	you	ask	me	to	help	you.?”
																Mrs.	Colombo	nodded	toward	his	wife.	“She	told	me	to	ask	you.”
																He	was	surprised.	His	wife	had	never	questioned	him	about	the	clothes he	had	washed	the	night	he	had	murdered	Fanucci.	Had	never	asked	him	where all	the	money	came	from	when	he	was	not	working.	Even	now	her	face	was impassive.	Vito	said	to	Mrs.	Colombo,	“I	can	give	you	some	money	to	help	you move,	is	that	what	you	want?”
																The	woman	shook	her	head,	she	was	in	tears.”	All	my	friends	are	here, all	the	girls	I	grew	up	with	in	Italy.	How	can	I	move	to	another	neighborhood with	strangers?	I	want	you	to	speak	to	the	landlord	to	let	me	stay.”
																Vito	nodded.	“It’s	done	then.	You	won’t	have	to	move.	I’ll	speak	to him	tomorrow	morning.”
																His	wife	gave	him	a	smile	which	he	did	not	acknowledge,	but	he	felt pleased.	Mrs.	Colombo	looked	a	little	uncertain.	“You’re	sure	he’ll	say	yes,	the landlord?”	she	asked.
																“Signor	Roberto?”	Vito	said	in	a	surprised	voice.	“Of	course	he	will. He’s	a	good-hearted	fellow.	Once	I	explain	how	things	are	with	you	he’ll	take pity	on	your	misfortunes.	Now	don’t	let	it	trouble	you	any	more.	Don’t	get	so upset.	Guard	your	health,	for	the	sake	of	your	children.”
	
																The	landlord,	Mr.	Roberto,	came	to	the	neighborhood	every	day	to check	on	the	row	of	five	tenements	that	he	owned.	He	was	a	padrone,	a	man who	sold	Italian	laborers	just	off	the	boat	to	the	big	corporations.	With	his
profits	he	had	bought	the	tenements	one	by	one.	An	educated	man	from	the North	of	Italy,	he	felt	only	contempt	for	these	illiterate	Southerners	from	Sicily and	Naples,	who	swarmed	like	vermin	through	his	buildings,	who	threw	garbage down	the	air	shafts,	who	let	cockroaches	and	rats	eat	away	his	walls	without lifting	a	hand	to	preserve	his	property.	He	was	not	a	bad	man,	he	was	a	good husband	and	father,	but	constant	worry	about	his	investments,	about	the	money he	earned,	about	the	inevitable	expenses	that	came	with	being	a	man	of	property had	worn	his	nerves	to	a	frazzle	so	that	he	was	in	a	constant	state	of	irritation. When	Vito	Corleone	stopped	him	on	the	street	to	ask	for	a	word,	Mr.	Roberto was	brusque.	Not	rude,	since	anyone	of	these	Southerners	might	stick	a	knife into	you	if	rubbed	the	wrong	way,	though	this	young	man	looked	like	a	quiet fellow.
																“Signor	Roberto,”	said	Vito	Corleone,	“the	friend	of	my	wife,	a	poor widow	with	no	man	to	protect	her,	tells	me	that	for	some	reason	she	has	been ordered	to	move	from	her	apartment	in	your	building.	She	is	in	despair.	She	has no	money,	she	has	no	friends	except	those	that	live	here.	I	told	her	that	I	would speak	to	you,	that	you	are	a	reasonable	man	who	acted	out	of	some misunderstanding.	She	has	gotten	rid	of	the	animal	that	caused	all	the	trouble and	so	why	shouldn’t	she	stay?	As	one	Italian	to	another,	I	ask	you	the	favor.”
																Signor	Roberto	studied	the	young	man	in	front	of	him.	He	saw	a	man of	medium	stature	but	strongly	built,	a	peasant	but	not	a	bandit,	though	he	so laughably	dared	to	call	himself	an	Italian.	Roberto	shrugged.	“I	have	already rented	the	apartment	to	another	family	for	higher	rent,”	he	said.	“I	cannot disappoint	them	for	the	sake	of	your	friend.”
																Vito	Corleone	nodded	in	agreeable	understanding.	“How	much	more	a month?”	he	asked.
																“Five	dollars,”	Mr.	Roberto	said.	This	was	a	lie.	The	railway	flat,	four dark	rooms,	rented	for	twelve	dollars	a	month	to	the	widow	and	he	had	not	been able	to	get	more	than	that	from	the	new	tenant.
	
																Vito	Corleone	took	a	roll	of	bills	out	of	his	pocket	and	peeled	off	three tens.	“Here	is	the	six	months’	increase	in	advance.	You	needn’t	speak	to	her about	it,	she’s	a	proud	woman.	See	me	again	in	another	six	months.	But	of course	you’ll	let	her	keep	her	dog.”
																“Like	hell,”	Mr.	Roberto	said.”	And	who	the	hell	are	you	to	give	me orders.	Watch	your	manners	or	you’ll	be	out	on	your	Sicilian	ass	in	the	street there.”
																Vito	Corleone	raised	his	hands	in	surprise.	“I’m	asking	you	a	favor, only	that.	One	never	knows	when	one	might	need	a	friend,	isn’t	that	true?	Here, take	this	money	as	a	sign	of	my	goodwill	and	make	your	own	decision.	I wouldn’t	dare	to	quarrel	with	it.”	He	thrust	the	money	into	Mr.	Roberto’s	hand. “Do	me	this	little	favor,	just	take	the	money	and	think	things	over.	Tomorrow morning	if	you	want	to	give	me	the	money	back	by	all	means	do	so.	If	you	want the	woman	out	of	your	house,	how	can	I	stop	you?	It’s	your	property,	after	all.	If you	don’t	want	the	dog	in	there,	I	can	understand.	I	dislike	animals	myself.”	He patted	Mr.	Roberto	on	the	shoulder.	“Do	me	this	service,	eh?	I	won’t	forget	it. Ask	your	friends	in	the	neighborhood	about	me,	they’ll	tell	you	I’m	a	man	who believes	in	showing	his	gratitude.”
																But	of	course	Mr.	Roberto	had	already	begun	to	understand.	That evening	he	made	inquiries	about	Vito	Corleone.	He	did	not	wait	until	the	next morning.	He	knocked	on	the	Corleone	door	that	very	night,	apologizing	for	the lateness	of	the	hour	and	accepted	a	glass	of	wine	from	Signora	Corleone.	He assured	Vito	Corleone	that	it	had	all	been	a	dreadful	misunderstanding,	that	of course	Signora	Colombo	could	remain	in	the	flat,	of	course	she	could	keep	her dog.	Who	were	those	miserable	tenants	to	complain	about	noise	from	a	poor animal	when	they	paid	such	a	low	rent?	At	the	finish	he	threw	the	thirty	dollars Vito	Corleone	had	given	him	on	the	table	and	said	in	the	most	sincere	fashion, “Your	good	heart	in	helping	this	poor	widow	has	shamed	me	and	I	wish	to	show that	I,	too,	have	some	Christian	charity.	Her	rent	will	remain	what	it	was.”
																All	concerned	played	this	comedy	prettily.	Vito	poured	wine,	called for	cakes,	wrung	Mr.	Roberto’s	hand	and	praised	his	warm	heart.	Mr.	Roberto sighed	and	said	that	having	made	the	acquaintance	of	such	a	man	as	Vito
Corleone	restored	his	faith	in	human	nature.	Finally	they	tore	themselves	away from	each	other.	Mr.	Roberto,	his	bones	turned	to	jelly	with	fear	at	his	narrow escape,	caught	the	streetcar	to	his	home	in	the	Bronx	and	took	to	his	bed.	He	did not	reappear	in	his	tenements	for	three	days.
	
																Vito	Corleone	was	now	a	“man	of	respect”	in	the	neighborhood.	He was	reputed	to	be	a	member	of	the	Mafia	of	Sicily.	One	day	a	man	who	ran	card games	in	a	furnished	room	came	to	him	and	voluntarily	paid	him	twenty	dollars each	week	for	his	“friendship.”	He	had	only	to	visit	the	game	once	or	twice	a week	to	let	the	players	understand	they	were	under	his	protection.
																Store	owners	who	had	problems	with	young	hoodlums	asked	him	to intercede.	He	did	so	and	was	properly	rewarded.	Soon	he	had	the	enormous income	for	that	time	and	place	of	one	hundred	dollars	a	week.	Since	Clemenza and	Tessio	were	his	friends,	his	allies,	he	had	to	give	them	each	part	of	the money,	but	this	he	did	without	being	asked.	Finally	he	decided	to	go	into	the olive	oil	importing	business	with	his	boyhood	chum,	Genco	Abbandando.	Genco would	handle	the	business,	the	importing	of	the	olive	oil	from	Italy,	the	buying at	the	proper	price,	the	storing	in	his	father’s	warehouse.	Genco	had	the experience	for	this	part	of	the	business.	Clemenza	and	Tessio	would	be	the salesmen.	They	would	go	to	every	Italian	grocery	store	in	Manhattan,	then Brooklyn,	then	the	Bronx,	to	persuade	store	owners	to	stock	Genco	Pura	olive oil.	(With	typical	modesty,	Vito	Corleone	refused	to	name	the	brand	after himself.)	Vito	of	course	would	be	the	head	of	the	firm	since	he	was	supplying most	of	the	capital.	He	also	would	be	called	in	on	special	cases,	where	store owners	resisted	the	sales	talks	of	Clemenza	and	Tessio.	Then	Vito	Corleone would	use	his	own	formidable	powers	of	persuasion.
																For	the	next	few	years	Vito	Corleone	lived	that	completely	satisfying life	of	a	small	businessman	wholly	devoted	to	building	up	his	commercial enterprise	in	a	dynamic,	expanding	economy.	He	was	a	devoted	father	and husband	but	so	busy	he	could	spare	his	family	little	of	his	time.	As	Genco	Pura olive	oil	grew	to	become	the	bestselling	imported	Italian	oil	in	America,	his organization	mushroomed.	Like	any	good	salesman	he	came	to	understand	the
benefits	of	undercutting	his	rivals	in	price,	barring	them	from	distribution	outlets by	persuading	store	owners	to	stock	less	of	their	brands.	Like	any	good businessman	he	aimed	at	holding	a	monopoly	by	forcing	his	rivals	to	abandon the	field	or	by	merging	with	his	own	company.	However,	since	he	had	started	off relatively	helpless,	economically,	since	he	did	not	believe	in	advertising,	relying on	word	of	mouth	and	since	if	truth	be	told,	his	olive	oil	was	no	better	than	his competitors’,	he	could	not	use	the	common	strangleholds	of	legitimate businessmen.	He	had	to	rely	on	the	force	of	his	own	personality	and	his reputation	as	a	“man	of	respect.”
																Even	as	a	young	man,	Vito	Corleone	became	known	as	a	“man	of reasonableness.”	He	never	uttered	a	threat.	He	always	used	logic	that	proved	to be	irresistible.	He	always	made	certain	that	the	other	fellow	got	his	share	of profit.	Nobody	lost.	He	did	this,	of	course,	by	obvious	means.	Like	many businessmen	of	genius	he	learned	that	free	competition	was	wasteful,	monopoly efficient.	And	so	he	simply	set	about	achieving	that	efficient	monopoly.	There were	some	oil	wholesalers	in	Brooklyn,	men	of	fiery	temper,	headstrong,	not amenable	to	reason,	who	refused	to	see,	to	recognize,	the	vision	of	Vito Corleone,	even	after	he	had	explained	everything	to	them	with	the	utmost patience	and	detail.	With	these	men	Vito	Corleone	threw	up	his	hands	in	despair and	sent	Tessio	to	Brooklyn	to	set	up	a	headquarters	and	solve	the	problem. Warehouses	were	bummed,	truckloads	of	olive-green	oil	were	dumped	to	form lakes	in	the	cobbled	waterfront	streets.	One	rash	man,	an	arrogant	Milanese	with more	faith	in	the	police	than	a	saint	has	in	Christ,	actually	went	to	the	authorities with	a	complaint	against	his	fellow	Italians,	breaking	the	ten-century-old	law	of omerta.	But	before	the	matter	could	progress	any	further	the	wholesaler disappeared,	never	to	be	seen	again,	leaving	behind,	deserted,	his	devoted	wife and	three	children,	who,	God	be	thanked,	were	fully	grown	and	capable	of	taking over	his	business	and	coming	to	terms	with	the	Genco	Pura	Oil	Company.
																But	great	men	are	not	born	great,	they	grow	great,	and	so	it	was	with Vito	Corleone.	When	prohibition	came	to	pass	and	alcohol	forbidden	to	be	sold, Vito	Corleone	made	the	final	step	from	a	quite	ordinary,	somewhat	ruthless businessman	to	a	great	Don	in	the	world	of	criminal	enterprise.	It	did	not	happen in	a	day,	it	did	not	happen	in	a	year,	but	by	the	end	of	the	Prohibition	period	and the	start	of	the	Great	Depression,	Vito	Corleone	had	become	the	Godfather,	the Don,	Don	Corleone.
																It	started	casually	enough.	By	this	time	the	Genco	Pura	Oil	Company had	a	fleet	of	six	delivery	trucks.	Through	Clemenza,	Vito	Corleone	was approached	by	a	group	of	Italian	bootleggers	who	smuggled	alcohol	and whiskey	in	from	Canada.	They	needed	trucks	and	deliverymen	to	distribute	their produce	over	New	York	City.	They	needed	deliverymen	who	were	reliable, discreet	and	of	a	certain	determination	and	force.	They	were	willing	to	pay	Vito Corleone	for	his	trucks	and	for	his	men.	The	fee	was	so	enormous	that	Vito Corleone	cut	back	drastically	on	his	oil	business	to	use	the	trucks	almost exclusively	for	the	service	of	the	bootlegger-smugglers.	This	despite	the	fact	that these	gentlemen	had	accompanied	their	offer	with	a	silky	threat.	But	even	then Vito	Corleone	was	so	mature	a	man	that	he	did	not	take	insult	at	a	threat	or become	angry	and	refuse	a	profitable	offer	because	of	it.	He	evaluated	the	threat, found	it	lacking	in	conviction,	and	lowered	his	opinion	of	his	new	partners because	they	had	been	so	stupid	to	use	threats	where	none	were	needed.	This was	useful	information	to	be	pondered	at	its	proper	time.
																Again	he	prospered.	But,	more	important,	he	acquired	knowledge	and contacts	and	experience.	And	he	piled	up	good	deeds	as	a	banker	piles	up securities.	For	in	the	following	years	it	became	clear	that	Vito	Corleone	was	not only	a	man	of	talent	but,	in	his	way,	a	genius.
																He	made	himself	the	protector	of	the	Italian	families	who	set themselves	up	as	small	speakeasies	in	their	homes,	selling	whiskey	at	fifteen cents	a	glass	to	bachelor	laborers.	He	became	godfather	to	Mrs.	Colombo’s youngest	son	when	the	lad	made	his	confirmation	and	gave	a	handsome	present of	a	twenty-dollar	gold	piece.	Meanwhile,	since	it	was	inevitable	that	some	of his	trucks	be	stopped	by	the	police,	Genco	Abbandando	hired	a	fine	lawyer	with many	contacts	in	the	Police	Department	and	the	judiciary.	A	system	of	payoffs was	set	up	and	soon	the	Corleone	organization	had	a	sizable	“sheet,”	the	list	of officials	entitled	to	a	monthly	sum.	When	the	lawyer	tried	to	keep	this	list	down, apologizing	for	the	expense,	Vito	Corleone	reassured	him.	“No,	no,”	he	said. “Get	everyone	on	it	even	if	they	can’t	help	us	right	now.	I	believe	in	friendship and	I	am	willing	to	show	my	friendship	first.”
																As	time	went	by	the	Corleone	empire	became	larger,	more	trucks	were added,	the	“sheet”	grew	longer.	Also	the	men	working	directly	for	Tessio	and
Clemenza	grew	in	number.	The	whole	thing	was	becoming	unwieldy.	Finally Vito	Corleone	worked	out	a	system	of	organization.	He	gave	Clemenza	and Tessio	each	the	title	of	Caporegime,	or	captain,	and	the	men	who	worked beneath	them	the	rank	of	soldier.	He	named	Genco	Abbandando	his	counselor, or	Consigliere.	He	put	layers	of	insulation	between	himself	and	any	operational act.	When	he	gave	an	order	it	was	to	Genco	or	to	one	of	the	caporegimes	alone. Rarely	did	he	have	a	witness	to	any	order	he	gave	any	particular	one	of	them. Then	he	split	Tessio’s	group	and	made	it	responsible	for	Brooklyn.	He	also	split Tessio	off	from	Clemenza	and	made	it	clear	over	the	years	that	he	did	not	want the	two	men	to	associate	even	socially	except	when	absolutely	necessary.	He explained	this	to	the	more	intelligent	Tessio,	who	caught	his	drift	immediately, though	Vito	explained	it	as	a	security	measure	against	the	law.	Tessio understood	that	Vito	did	not	want	his	two	caporegimes	to	have	any	opportunity to	conspire	against	him	and	he	also	understood	there	was	no	ill	will	involved, merely	a	tactical	precaution.	In	return	Vito	gave	Tessio	a	free	hand	in	Brooklyn while	he	kept	Clemenza’s	Bronx	life	very	much	under	his	thumb.	Clemenza	was the	braver,	more	reckless,	the	crueler	man	despite	his	outward	jollity,	and	needed a	tighter	rein.
																The	Great	Depression	increased	the	power	of	Vito	Corleone.	And indeed	it	was	about	that	time	he	came	to	be	called	Don	Corleone.	Everywhere	in the	city,	honest	men	begged	for	honest	work	in	vain.	Proud	men	demeaned themselves	and	their	families	to	accept	official	charity	from	a	contemptuous officialdom.	But	the	men	of	Don	Corleone	walked	the	streets	with	their	heads held	high,	their	pockets	stuffed	with	silver	and	paper	money.	With	no	fear	of losing	their	jobs.	And	even	Don	Corleone,	that	most	modest	of	men,	could	not help	feeling	a	sense	of	pride.	He	was	taking	care	of	his	world,	his	people.	He	had not	failed	those	who	depended	on	him	and	gave	him	the	sweat	of	their	brows, risked	their	freedom	and	their	lives	in	his	service.	And	when	an	employee	of	his was	arrested	and	sent	to	prison	by	some	mischance,	that	unfortunate	man’s family	received	a	living	allowance;	and	not	a	miserly,	beggarly,	begrudging pittance	but	the	same	amount	the	man	earned	when	free.
																This	of	course	was	not	pure	Christian	charity.	Not	his	best	friends would	have	called	Don	Corleone	a	saint	from	heaven.	There	was	some	selfinterest	in	this	generosity.	An	employee	sent	to	prison	knew	he	had	only	to	keep his	mouth	shut	and	his	wife	and	children	would	be	cared	for.	He	knew	that	if	he