		The	death	of	Santino	Corleone	sent	shock	waves	through	the underworld	of	the	nation.	And	when	it	became	known	that	Don	Corleone	had risen	from	his	sick	bed	to	take	charge	of	the	Family	affairs,	when	spies	at	the funeral	reported	that	the	Don	seemed	to	be	fully	recovered,	the	heads	of	the	Five Families	made	frantic	efforts	to	prepare	a	defense	against	the	bloody	retaliatory war	that	was	sure	to	follow.	Nobody	made	the	mistake	of	assuming	that	Don Corleone	could	be	held	cheaply	because	of	his	past	misfortunes.	He	was	a	man who	had	made	only	a	few	mistakes	in	his	career	and	had	learned	from	everyone of	them.
																Only	Hagen	guessed	the	Don’s	real	intentions	and	was	not	surprised when	emissaries	were	sent	to	the	Five	Families	to	propose	a	peace.	Not	only	to propose	a	peace	but	a	meeting	of	all	the	Families	in	the	city	and	with	invitations to	Families	all	over	the	United	States	to	attend.	Since	the	New	York	Families were	the	most	powerful	in	the	country,	it	was	understood	that	their	welfare affected	the	welfare	of	the	country	as	a	whole.
																At	first	there	were	suspicions.	Was	Don	Corleone	preparing	a	trap? Was	he	trying	to	throw	his	enemies	off	their	guard?	Was	he	attempting	to prepare	a	wholesale	massacre	to	avenge	his	son?	But	Don	Corleone	soon	made	it clear	that	he	was	sincere.	Not	only	did	he	involve	all	the	Families	in	the	country in	this	meeting,	but	made	no	move	to	put	his	own	people	on	a	war	footing	or	to enlist	allies.	And	then	he	took	the	final	irrevocable	step	that	established	the authenticity	of	these	intentions	and	assured	the	safety	of	the	grand	council	to	be assembled.	He	called	on	the	services	of	the	Bocchicchio	Family.
																The	Bocchicchio	Family	was	unique	in	that,	once	a	particularly ferocious	branch	of	the	Mafia	in	Sicily,	it	had	become	an	instrument	of	peace	in America.	Once	a	group	of	men	who	earned	their	living	by	a	savage
determination,	they	now	earned	their	living	in	what	perhaps	could	be	called	a saintly	fashion.	The	Bocchicchios’	one	asset	was	a	closely	knit	structure	of blood	relationships,	a	family	loyalty	severe	even	for	a	society	where	family loyalty	came	before	loyalty	to	a	wife.
																The	Bocchicchio	Family,	extending	out	to	third	cousins,	had	once numbered	nearly	two	hundred	when	they	ruled	the	particular	economy	of	a	small section	of	southern	Sicily.	The	income	for	the	entire	family	then	came	from	four or	five	flour	mills,	by	no	means	owned	communally,	but	assuring	labor	and bread	and	a	minimal	security	for	all	Family	members.	This	was	enough,	with intermarriages,	for	them	to	present	a	common	front	against	their	enemies.
																No	competing	mill,	no	dam	that	would	create	a	water	supply	to	their competitors	or	ruin	their	own	selling	of	water,	was	allowed	to	be	built	in	their corner	of	Sicily.	A	powerful	landowning	baron	once	tried	to	erect	his	own	mill strictly	for	his	personal	use.	The	mill	was	bummed	down.	He	called	on	the carabineri	and	higher	authorities,	who	arrested	three	of	the	Bocchicchio	Family. Even	before	the	trial	the	manor	house	of	the	baron	was	torched.	The	indictment and	accusations	were	withdrawn.	A	few	months	later	one	of	the	highest functionaries	in	the	Italian	government	arrived	in	Sicily	and	tried	to	solve	the chronic	water	shortage	of	that	island	by	proposing	a	huge	dam.	Engineers arrived	from	Rome	to	do	surveys	while	watched	by	grim	natives,	members	of	the Bocchicchio	clan.	Police	flooded	the	area,	housed	in	a	specially	built	barracks.
																It	looked	like	nothing	could	stop	the	dam	from	being	built	and	supplies and	equipment	had	actually	been	unloaded	in	Palermo.	That	was	as	far	as	they got.	The	Bocchicchios	had	contacted	fellow	Mafia	chiefs	and	extracted agreements	for	their	aid.	The	heavy	equipment	was	sabotaged,	the	lighter equipment	stolen.	Mafia	deputies	in	the	Italian	Parliament	launched	a bureaucratic	counterattack	against	the	planners.	This	went	on	for	several	years and	in	that	time	Mussolini	came	to	power.	The	dictator	decreed	that	the	dam must	be	built.	It	was	not.	The	dictator	had	known	that	the	Mafia	would	be	a threat	to	his	regime,	forming	what	amounted	to	a	separate	authority	from	his own.	He	gave	full	powers	to	a	high	police	official,	who	promptly	solved	the problem	by	throwing	everybody	into	jailor	deporting	them	to	penal	work	islands. In	a	few	short	years	he	had	broken	the	power	of	the	Mafia,	simply	by	arbitrarily
arresting	anyone	even	suspected	of	being	a	mafioso.	And	so	also	brought	ruin	to a	great	many	innocent	families.
																The	Bocchicchios	had	been	rash	enough	to	resort	to	force	against	this unlimited	power.	Half	of	the	men	were	killed	in	armed	combat,	the	other	half deported	to	penal	island	colonies.	There	were	only	a	handful	left	when arrangements	were	made	for	them	to	emigrate	to	America	via	the	clandestine underground	route	of	jumping	ship	through	Canada.	There	were	almost	twenty immigrants	and	they	settled	in	a	small	town	not	far	from	New	York	City,	in	the Hudson	Valley,	where	by	starting	at	the	very	bottom	they	worked	their	way	up to	owning	a	garbage	hauling	firm	and	their	own	trucks.	They	became	prosperous because	they	had	no	competition.	They	had	no	competition	because	competitors found	their	trucks	burned	and	sabotaged.	One	persistent	fellow	who	undercut prices	was	found	buried	in	the	garbage	he	had	picked	up	during	the	day, smothered	to	death.
																But	as	the	men	married,	to	Sicilian	girls,	needless	to	say,	children came,	and.	the	garbage	business	though	providing	a	living,	was	not	really enough	to	pay	for	the	finer	things	America	had	to	offer.	And	so,	as	a diversification,	the	Bocchicchio	Family	became	negotiators	and	hostages	in	the peace	efforts	of	warring	Mafia	families.
																A	strain	of	stupidity	ran	through	the	Bocchicchio	clan,	or	perhaps	they were	just	primitive.	In	any	case	they	recognized	their	limitations	and	knew	they could	not	compete	with	other	Mafia	families	in	the	struggle	to	organize	and control	more	sophisticated	business	structures	like	prostitution,	gambling,	dope and	public	fraud.	They	were	straight-from-the-shoulder	people	who	could	offer	a gift	to	an	ordinary	patrolman	but	did	not	know	how	to	approach	a	political bagman.	They	had	only	two	assets.	Their	honor	and	their	ferocity.
																A	Bocchicchio	never	lied,	never	committed	an	act	of	treachery.	Such behavior	Was	too	complicated.	Also,	a	Bocchicchio	never	forgot	an	injury	and never	left	it	unavenged	no	matter	what	the	cost.	And	so	by	accident	they stumbled	into	what	would	prove	to	be	their	most	lucrative	profession.
																When	warring	families	wanted	to	make	peace	and	arrange	a	parley,	the
Bocchicchio	clan	was	contacted.	The	head	of	the	clan	would	handle	the	initial negotiations	and	arrange	for	the	necessary	hostages.	For	instance,	when	Michael had	gone	to	meet	Sollozzo,	a	Bocchicchio	had	been	left	with	the	Corleone Family	as	surety	for	Michael’s	safety,	the	service	paid	for	by	Sollozzo.	If Michael	were	killed	by	Sollozzo,	then	the	Bocchicchio	male	hostage	held	by	the Corleone	Family	would	be	killed	by	the	Corleones.	In	this	case	the	Bocchicchios would	take	their	vengeance	on	Sollozzo	as	the	cause	of	their	clansman’s	death. Since	the	Bocchicchios	were	so	primitive,	they	never	let	anything,	any	kind	of punishment,	stand	in	their	way	of	vengeance.	They	would	give	up	their	own lives	and	there	was	no	protection	against	them	if	they	were	betrayed.	A Bocchicchio	hostage	was	gilt-edged	insurance.
																And	so	now	when	Don	Corleone	employed	the	Bocchicchios	as negotiators	and	arranged	for	them	to	supply	hostages	for	all	the	Families	to	come to	the	peace	meeting,	there	could	be	no	question	as	to	his	sincerity.	There	could be	no	question	of	treachery.	The	meeting	would	be	safe	as	a	wedding.
																Hostages	given,	the	meeting	took	place	in	the	director’s	conference room	of	a	small	commercial	bank	whose	president	was	indebted	to	Don Corleone	and	indeed	some	of	whose	stock	belonged	to	Don	Corleone	though	it was	in	the	president’s	name.	The	president	always	treasured	that	moment	when he	had	offered	to	give	Don	Corleone	a	written	document	proving	his	ownership of	the	shares,	to	preclude	any	treachery.	Don	Corleone	had	been	horrified.	“I would	trust	you	with	my	whole	fortune,”	he	told	the	president.	“I	would	trust you	with	my	life	and	the	welfare	of	my	children.	It	is	inconceivable	to	me	that you	would	ever	trick	me	or	otherwise	betray	me.	My	whole	world,	all	my	faith in	my	judgment	of	human	character	would	collapse.	Of	course	I	have	my	own written	records	so	that	if	something	should	happen	to	me	my	heirs	would	know that	you	hold	something	in	trust	for	them.	But	I	know	that	even	if	I	were	not	here in	this	world	to	guard	the	interests	of	my	children,	you	would	be	faithful	to	their needs.”
																The	president	of	the	bank,	though	not	Sicilian,	was	a	man	of	tender sensibilities.	He	understood	the	Don	perfectly.	Now	the	Godfather’s	request	was the	president’s	command	and	so	on	a	Saturday	afternoon,	the	executive	suite	of the	bank,	the	conference	room	with	its	deep	leather	chairs,	its	absolute	privacy,
was	made	available	to	the	Families.
																Security	at	the	bank	was	taken	over	by	a	small	army	of	handpicked men	wearing	bank	guard	uniforms.	At	ten	o’clock	on	a	Saturday	morning	the conference	room	began	to	fill	up.	Besides	the	Five	Families	of	New	York,	there were	representatives	from	ten	other	Families	across	the	country,	with	the exception	of	Chicago,	that	black	sheep	of	their	world.	They	had	given	up	trying to	civilize	Chicago,	and	they	saw	no	point	in	including	those	mad	dogs	in	this important	conference.
																A	bar	had	been	set	up	and	a	small	buffet.	Each	representative	to	the conference	had	been	allowed	one	aide.	Most	of	the	Dons	had	brought	their Consiglieres	as	aides	so	there	were	comparatively	few	young	men	in	the	room. Tom	Hagen	was	one	of	those	young	men	and	the	only	one	who	was	not	Sicilian. He	was	an	object	of	curiosity,	a	freak.
																Hagen	knew	his	manners.	He	did	not	speak,	he	did	not	smile.	He waited	on	his	boss,	Don	Corleone,	with	all	the	respect	of	a	favorite	earl	waiting on	his	king;	bringing	him	a	cold	drink,	lighting	his	cigar,	positioning	his	ashtray; with	respect	but	no	obsequiousness.
																Hagen	was	the	only	one	in	that	room	who	knew	the	identity	of	the portraits	hanging	on	the	dark	paneled	walls.	They	were	mostly	portraits	of fabulous	financial	figures	done	in	rich	oils.	One	was	of	Secretary	of	the	Treasury Hamilton.	Hagen	could	not	help	thinking	that	Hamilton	might	have	approved	of this	peace	meeting	being	held	in	a	banking	institution.	Nothing	was	more calming,	more	conducive	to	pure	reason,	than	the	atmosphere	of	money.
																The	arrival	time	had	been	staggered	for	between	nine-thirty	to	ten A.M.	Don	Corleone,	in	a	sense	the	host	since	he	had	initiated	the	peace	talks, had	been	the	first	to	arrive;	one	of	his	many	virtues	was	punctuality.	The	next	to arrive	was	Carlo	Tramonti,	who	had	made	the	southern	part	of	the	United	States his	territory.	He	was	an	impressively	handsome	middle-aged	man,	tall	for	a Sicilian,	with	a	very	deep	sunburn,	exquisitely	tailored	and	barbered.	He	did	not look	Italian,	he	looked	more	like	one	of	those	pictures	in	the	magazines	of millionaire	fishermen	lolling	on	their	yachts.	The	Tramonti	Family	earned	its
livelihood	from	gambling,	and	no	one	meeting	their	Don	would	ever	guess	with what	ferocity	he	had	won	his	empire.
																Emigrating	from	Sicily	as	a	small	boy,	he	had	settled	in	Florida	and grown	to	manhood	there,	employed	by	the	American	syndicate	of	Southern small-town	politicians	who	controlled	gambling.	These	were	very	tough	men backed	up	by	very	tough	police	officials	and	they	never	suspected	that	they could	be	overthrown	by	such	a	greenhorn	immigrant.	They	were	unprepared	for his	ferocity	and	could	not	match	it	simply	because	the	rewards	being	fought	over were	not,	to	their	minds,	worth	so	much	bloodshed.	Tramonti	won	over	the police	with	bigger	shares	of	the	gross;	he	exterminated	those	redneck	hooligans who	ran	their	operation	with	such	a	complete	lack	of	imagination.	It	was Tramonti	who	opened	ties	with	Cuba	and	the	Batista	regime	and	eventually poured	money	into	the	pleasure	resorts	of	Havana	gambling	houses, whorehouses,	to	lure	gamblers	from	the	American	mainland.	Tramonti	was	now a	millionaire	many	times	over	and	owned	one	of	the	most	luxurious	hotels	in Miami	Beach.
																When	he	came	into	the	conference	room	followed	by	his	aide,	an equally	sunburned	Consigliere,	Tramonti	embraced	Don	Corleone,	made	a	face of	sympathy	to	show	he	sorrowed	for	the	dead	son.
																Other	Dons	were	arriving.	They	all	knew	each	other,	they	had	met over	the	years,	either	socially	or	when	in	the	pursuit	of	their	businesses.	They had	always	showed	each	other	professional	courtesies	and	in	their	younger, leaner	days	had	done	each	other	little	services.	The	second	Don	to	arrive	was Joseph	Zaluchi	from	Detroit.	The	Zaluchi	Family,	under	appropriate	disguises and	covers,	owned	one	of	the	horse-racing	tracks	in	the	Detroit	area.	They	also owned	a	good	part	of	the	gambling.	Zaluchi	was	a	moon-faced,	amiable-looking man	who	lived	in	a	one-hundred-thousand-dollar	house	in	the	fashionable Grosse	Pointe	section	of	Detroit.	One	of	his	sons	had	married	into	an	old,	wellknown	American	family.	Zaluchi,	like	Don	Corleone,	was	sophisticated.	Detroit had	the	lowest	incidence	of	physical	violence	of	any	of	the	cities	controlled	by the	Families;	there	had	been	only	two	executions	in	the	last	three	years	in	that city.	He	disapproved	of	traffic	in	drugs.
																Zaluchi	had	brought	his	Consigliere	with	him	and	both	men	came	to Don	Corleone	to	embrace	him.	Zaluchi	had	a	booming	American	voice	with only	the	slightest	trace	of	an	accent.	He	was	conservatively	dressed,	very businessman,	and	with	a	hearty	goodwill	to	match.	He	said	to	Don	Corleone, “Only	your	voice	could	have	brought	me	here.”	Don	Corleone	bowed	his	head	in thanks.	He	could	count	on	Zaluchi	for	support.
																The	next	two	Dons	to	arrive	were	from	the	West	Coast,	motoring	from there	in	the	same	car	since	they	worked	together	closely	in	any	case.	They	were Frank	Falcone	and	Anthony	Molinari	and	both	were	younger	than	any	of	the other	men	who	would	come	to	the	meeting;	in	their	early	forties.	They	were dressed	a	little	more	informally	than	the	others,	there	was	a	touch	of	Hollywood in	their	style	and	they	were	a	little	more	friendly	than	necessary.	Frank	Falcone controlled	the	movie	unions	and	the	gambling	at	the	studios	plus	a	complex	of pipeline	prostitution	that	supplied	girls	to	the	whorehouses	of	the	states	in	the Far	West.	It	was	not	in	the	realm	of	possibility	for	any	Don	to	become	“show biz”	but	Falcone	had	just	a	touch.	His	fellow	Dons	distrusted	him	accordingly.
																Anthony	Molinari	controlled	the	waterfronts	of	San	Francisco	and	was preeminent	in	the	empire	of	sports	gambling.	He	came	of	Italian	fishermen	stock and	owned	the	best	San	Francisco	sea	food	restaurant,	in	which	he	took	such pride	that	the	legend	had	it	he	lost	money	on	the	enterprise	by	giving	too	good value	for	the	prices	charged.	He	had	the	impassive	face	of	the	professional gambler	and	it	was	known	that	he	also	had	something	to	do	with	dope	smuggling over	the	Mexican	border	and	from	the	ships	plying	the	lanes	of	the	oriental oceans.	Their	aides	were	young,	powerfully	built	men,	obviously	not	counselors but	bodyguards,	though	they	would	not	dare	to	carry	arms	to	this	meeting.	It	was general	knowledge	that	these	bodyguards	knew	karate,	a	fact	that	amused	the other	Dons	but	did	not	alarm	them	in	the	slightest,	no	more	than	if	the	California Dons	had	come	wearing	amulets	blessed	by	the	Pope.	Though	it	must	be	noted that	some	of	these	men	were	religious	and	believed	in	God.
																Next	arrived	the	representative	from	the	Family	in	Boston.	This	was the	only	Don	who	did	not	have	the	respect	of	his	fellows.	He	was	known	as	a man	who	did	not	do	right	by	his	“people,”	who	cheated	them	unmercifully.	This could	be	forgiven,	each	man	measures	his	own	greed.	What	could	not	be
forgiven	was	that	he	could	not	keep	order	in	his	empire.	The	Boston	area	had	too many	murders,	too	many	petty	wars	for	power,	too	many	unsupported	free-lance activities;	it	flouted	the	law	too	brazenly.	If	the	Chicago	Mafia	were	savages, then	the	Boston	people	were	gavones,	or	uncouth	louts;	ruffians.	The	Boston Don’s	name	was	Domenick	Panza.	He	was	short,	squat;	as	one	Don	put	it,	he looked	like	a	thief.
																The	Cleveland	syndicate,	perhaps	the	most	powerful	of	the	strictly gambling	operations	in	the	United	States,	was	represented	by	a	sensitive-looking elderly	man	with	gaunt	features	and	snow-white	hair.	He	was	known,	of	course not	to	his	face,	as	“the	Jew”	because	he	had	surrounded	himself	with	Jewish assistants	rather	than	Sicilians.	It	was	even	rumored	that	he	would	have	named	a Jew	as	his	Consigliere	if	he	had	dared.	In	any	case,	as	Don	Corleone’s	Family was	known	as	the	Irish	Gang	because	of	Hagen’s	membership,	so	Don	Vincent Fortenza’s	Family	was	known	as	the	Jewish	Family	with	somewhat	more accuracy.	But	he	ran	an	extremely	efficient	organization	and	he	was	not	known ever	to	have	fainted	at	the	sight	of	blood,	despite	his	sensitive	features.	He	ruled with	an	iron	hand	in	a	velvet	political	glove.
																The	representatives	of	the	Five	Families	of	New	York	were	the	last	to arrive	and	Tom	Hagen	was	struck	by	how	much	more	imposing,	impressive, these	five	men	were	than	the	out-of-towners,	the	hicks.	For	one	thing,	the	five New	York	Dons	were	in	the	old	Sicilian	tradition,	they	were	“men	with	a	belly” meaning,	figuratively,	power	and	courage;	and	literally,	physical	flesh,	as	if	the two	went	together,	as	indeed	they	seem	to	have	done	in	Sicily.	The	five	New York	Dons	were	stout,	corpulent	men	with	massive	leonine	heads,	features	on	a large	scale,	fleshy	imperial	noses,	thick	mouths,	heavy	folded	cheeks.	They	were not	too	well	tailored	or	barbered;	they	had	the	look	of	no-nonsense	busy	men without	vanity.
																There	was	Anthony	Stracci,	who	controlled	the	New	Jersey	area	and the	shipping	on	the	West	Side	docks	of	Manhattan.	He	ran	the	gambling	in Jersey	and	was	very	strong	with	the	Democratic	political	machine.	He	had	a	fleet of	freight	hauling	trucks	that	made	him	a	fortune	primarily	because	his	trucks could	travel	with	a	heavy	overload	and	not	be	stopped	and	fined	by	highway weight	inspectors.	These	trucks	helped	ruin	the	highways	and	then	his	road
building	firm,	with	lucrative	state	contracts,	repaired	the	damage	wrought.	It	was the	kind	of	operation	that	would	warm	any	man’s	heart,	business	of	itself creating	more	business.	Stracci,	too,	was	old-fashioned	and	never	dealt	in prostitution,	but	because	his	business	was	on	the	waterfront	it	was	impossible	for him	not	to	be	involved	in	the	drug	smuggling	traffic.	Of	the	five	New	York Families	opposing	the	Corleones	his	was	the	least	powerful	but	the	most	well disposed.
																The	Family	that	controlled	upper	New	York	State,	that	arranged smuggling	of	Italian	immigrants	from	Canada,	all	upstate	gambling	and exercised	veto	power	on	state	licensing	of	racing	tracks,	was	headed	by	Ottilio Cuneo.	This	was	a	completely	disarming	man	with	the	face	of	a	jolly	round peasant	baker,	whose	legitimate	activity	was	one	of	the	big	milk	companies. Cuneo	was	one	of	those	men	who	loved	children	and	carried	a	pocket	full	of sweets	in	the	hopes	of	being	able	to	pleasure	one	of	his	many	grandchildren	or the	small	offspring	of	his	associates.	He	wore	a	round	fedora	with	the	brim turned	down	all	the	way	round	like	a	woman’s	sun	hat,	which	broadened	his already	moon	shaped	face	into	the	very	mask	of	joviality.	He	was	one	of	the	few Dons	who	had	never	been	arrested	and	whose	true	activities	had	never	even	been suspected.	So	much	so	that	he	had	served	on	civic	committees	and	had	been voted	as	“Businessman	of	the	Year	for	the	State	of	New	York”	by	the	Chamber of	Commerce.
																The	closest	ally	to	the	Tattaglia	Family	was	Don	Emilio	Barzini.	He had	some	of	the	gambling	in	Brooklyn	and	some	in	Queens.	He	had	some prostitution.	He	had	strong-arm.	He	completely	controlled	Staten	Island.	He	had some	of	the	sports	betting	in	the	Bronx	and	Westchester.	He	was	in	narcotics.	He had	close	ties	to	Cleveland	and	the	West	Coast	and	he	was	one	of	the	few	men shrewd	enough	to	be	interested	in	Las	Vegas	and	Reno,	the	open	cities	of Nevada.	He	also	had	interests	in	Miami	Beach	and	Cuba.	After	the	Corleone Family,	his	was	perhaps	the	strongest	in	New	York	and	therefore	in	the	country. His	influence	reached	even	to	Sicily.	His	hand	was	in	every	unlawful	pie.	He was	even	rumored	to	have	a	toehold	in	Wall	Street.	He	had	supported	the Tattaglia	Family	with	money	and	influence	since	the	start	of	the	war.	It	was	his ambition	to	supplant	Don	Corleone	as	the	most	powerful	and	respected	Mafia leader	in	the	country	and	to	take	over	part	of	the	Corleone	empire.	He	was	a	man much	like	Don	Corleone,	but	more	modern,	more	sophisticated,	more
businesslike.	He	could	never	be	called	an	old	Moustache	Pete	and	he	had	the confidence	of	the	newer,	younger,	brasher	leaders	on	their	way	up.	He	was	a man	of	great	personal	force	in	a	cold	way,	with	none	of	Don	Corleone’s	warmth and	he	was	perhaps	at	this	moment	the	most	“respected”	man	in	the	group.
																The	last	to	arrive	was	Don	Phillip	Tattaglia,	the	head	of	the	Tattaglia Family	that	had	directly	challenged	the	Corleone	power	by	supporting	Sollozzo, and	had	so	nearly	succeeded.	And	yet	curiously	enough	he	was	held	in	a	slight contempt	by	the	others.	For	one	thing,	it	was	known	that	he	had	allowed	himself to	be	dominated	by	Sollozzo,	had	in	fact	been	led	by	the	nose	by	that	fine Turkish	hand.	He	was	held	responsible	for	all	this	commotion,	this	uproar	that had	so	affected	the	conduct	of	everyday	business	by	the	New	York	Families. Also	he	was	a	sixty-year-old	dandy	and	woman-chaser.	And	he	had	ample opportunity	to	indulge	his	weakness.
																For	the	Tattaglia	Family	dealt	in	women.	Its	main	business	was prostitution.	It	also	controlled	most	of	the	nightclubs	in	the	United	States	and could	place	any	talent	anywhere	in	the	country.	Phillip	Tattaglia	was	not	above using	strong-arm	to	get	control	of	promising	singers	and	comics	and	muscling	in on	record	firms.	But	prostitution	was	the	main	source	of	the	Family	income.
																His	personality	was	unpleasant	to	these	men.	He	was	a	whiner,	always complaining	of	the	costs	in	his	Family	business.	Laundry	bills,	all	those	towels, ate	up	the	profits	(but	he	owned	the	laundry	firm	that	did	the	work).	The	girls were	lazy	and	unstable,	running	off,	committing	suicide.	The	pimps	were treacherous	and	dishonest	and	without	a	shred	of	loyalty.	Good	help	was	hard	to find.	Young	lads	of	Sicilian	blood	turned	up	their	noses	at	such	work,	considered it	beneath	their	honor	to	traffic	and	abuse	women;	those	rascals	who	would	slit	a throat	with	a	song	on	their	lips	and	the	cross	of	an	Easter	palm	in	the	lapel	of their	jackets.	So	Phillip	Tattaglia	would	rant	on	to	audiences	unsympathetic	and contemptuous.	His	biggest	howl	was	reserved	for	authorities	who	had	it	in	their power	to	issue	and	cancel	liquor	licenses	for	his	nightclubs	and	cabarets.	He swore	he	had	made	more	millionaires	than	Wall	Street	with	the	money	he	had paid	those	thieving	guardians	of	official	seals.
																In	a	curious	way	his	almost	victorious	war	against	the	Corleone
Family	had	not	won	him	the	respect	it	deserved.	They	knew	his	strength	had come	first	from	Sollozzo	and	then	from	the	Banini	Family.	Also	the	fact	that with	the	advantage	of	surprise	he	had	not	won	complete	victory	was	evidence against	him.	If	he	had	been	more	efficient,	all	this	trouble	could	have	been avoided.	The	death	of	Don	Corleone	would	have	meant	the	end	of	the	war.
																It	was	proper,	since	they	had	both	lost	sons	in	their	war	against	each other,	that	Don	Corleone	and	Phillip	Tattaglia	should	acknowledge	each	other’s presence	only	with	a	formal	nod.	Don	Corleone	was	the	object	of	attention,	the other	men	studying	him	to	see	what	mark	of	weakness	had	been	left	on	him	by his	wounds	and	defeats.	The	puzzling	factor	was	why	Don	Corleone	had	sued	for peace	after	the	death	of	his	favorite	son.	It	was	an	acknowledgment	of	defeat	and would	almost	surely	lead	to	a	lessening	of	his	power.	But	they	would	soon	know.
																There	were	greetings,	there	were	drinks	to	be	served	and	almost another	half	hour	went	by	before	Don	Corleone	took	his	seat	at	the	polished walnut	table.	Unobtrusively,	Hagen	sat	in	the	chair	slightly	to	the	Don’s	left	and behind	him.	This	was	the	signal	for	the	other	Dons	to	make	their	way	to	the table.	Their	aides	sat	behind	them,	the	Consiglieres	up	close	so	that	they	could offer	any	advice	when	needed.
																Don	Corleone	was	the	first	to	speak	and	he	spoke	as	if	nothing	had happened.	As	if	he	had	not	been	grievously	wounded	and	his	eldest	son	slain,	his empire	in	a	shambles,	his	personal	family	scattered,	Freddie	in	the	West	and under	the	protection	of	the	Molinari	Family	and	Michael	secreted	in	the wastelands	of	Sicily.	He	spoke’	naturally,	in	Sicilian	dialect.
																“I	want	to	thank	you	all	for	coming,”	he	said.	“I	consider	it	a	service done	to	me	personally	and	I	am	in	the	debt	of	each	and	every	one	of	you.	And	so I	will	say	at	the	beginning	that	I	am	here	not	to	quarrel	or	convince,	but	only	to reason	and	as	a	reasonable	man	do	everything	possible	for	us	all	to	part	friends here	too.	I	give	my	word	on	that,	and	some	of	you	who	know	me	well	know	I	do not	give	my	word	lightly.	Ah,	well,	let’s	get	down	to	business.	We	are	all honorable	men	here,	we	don’t	have	to	give	each	other	assurances	as	if	we	were lawyers.”