was	perhaps	this	that	saved	his	life.	He	clung	to	the	iron	railings	with	his	hands so	that	Sonny	could	not	drag	him	into	the	street	and	despite	his	obvious	equal strength,	still	refused	to	fight	back.	He	let	the	blows	rain	on	his	unprotected	head and	neck	until	Sonny’s	rage	ebbed.	Finally,	his	chest	heaving,	Sonny	looked down	at	him	and	said,	“You	dirty	bastard,	you	ever	beat	up	my	sister	again	I’ll kill	you.”
																These	words	released	the	tension.	Because	of	course,	if	Sonny intended	to	kill	the	man	he	would	never	have	uttered	the	threat.	He	uttered	it	in frustration	because	he	could	not	carry	it	out.	Carlo	refused	to	look	at	Sonny.	He kept	his	head	down	and	his	hands	and	arms	entwined	in	the	iron	railing.	He stayed	that	way	until	the	car	roared	off	and	he	heard	Coach	say	in	his	curiously paternal	voice,	“OK,	Carlo,	come	on	into	the	store.	Let’s	get	out	of	sight.”
																It	was	only	then	that	Carlo	dared	to	get	out	of	his	crouch	against	the stone	steps	of	the	stoop	and	unlock	his	hands	from	the	railing.	Standing	up,	he could	see	the	kids	look	at	him	with	the	staring,	sickened	faces	of	people	who	had witnessed	the	degradation	of	a	fellow	human	being.	He	was	a	little	dizzy	but	it was	more	from	shock,	the	raw	fear	that	had	taken	command	of	his	body;	he	was not	badly	hurt	despite	the	shower	of	heavy	blows.	He	let	Coach	lead	him	by	the arm	into	the	back	room	of	the	candy	store	and	put	ice	on	his	face,	which,	though it	was	not	cut	or	bleeding,	was	lumpy	with	swelling	bruises.	The	fear	was subsiding	now	and	the	humiliation	he	had	suffered	made	him	sick	to	his	stomach so	that	he	had	to	throw	up.	Coach	held	his	head	over	the	sink,	supported	him	as if	he	were	drunk,	then	helped	him	upstairs	to	the	apartment	and	made	him	lie down	in	one	of	the	bedrooms.	Carlo	never	noticed	that	Sally	Rags	had disappeared.
																Sally	Rags	had	walked	down	to	Third	Avenue	and	called	Rocco Lampone	to	report	what	had	happened.	Rocco	took	the	news	calmly	and	in	his turn	called	his	caporegime,	Pete	Clemenza.	Clemenza	groaned	and	said,	“Oh, Christ,	that	goddamn	Sonny	and	his	temper,”	but	his	finger	had	prudently clicked	down	on	the	hook	so	that	Rocco	never	heard	his	remark.
																Clemenza	called	the	house	in	Long	Beach	and	got	Tom	Hagen.	Hagen was	silent	for	a	moment	and	then	he	said,	“Send	some	of	your	people	and	cars
out	on	the	road	to	Long	Beach	as	soon	as	you	can,	just	in	case	Sonny	gets	held up	by	traffic	or	an	accident.	When	he	gets	sore	like	that	he.	doesn’t	know	what the	hell	he’s	doing.	Maybe	some	of	our	friends	on	the	other	side	will	hear	he	was in	town.	You	never	can	tell.”
																Clemenza	said	doubtfully,	“By	the	time	I	could	get	anybody	on	the road,	Sonny	will	be	home.	That	goes	for	the	Tattaglias	too.”
																“I	know,”	Hagen	said	patiently.	“But	if	something	out	of	the	ordinary happens,	Sonny	may	be	held	up.	Do	the	best	you	can,	Pete.”
																Grudgingly	Clemenza	called	Rocco	Lampone	and	told	him	to	get	a few	people	and	cars	and	cover	the	road	to	Long	Beach.	He	himself	went	out	to his	beloved	Cadillac	and	with	three	of	the	platoon	of	guards	who	now	garrisoned his	home,	started	over	the	Atlantic	Beach	Bridge,	toward	New	York	City.
																One	of	the	hangers-on	around	the	candy	store,	a	small	bettor	on	the payroll	of	the	Tattaglia	Family	as	an	informer,	called	the	contact	he	had	with	his people.	But	the	Tattaglia	Family	had	not	streamlined	itself	for	the	war,	the contact	still	had	to	go	all	the	way	through	the	insulation	layers	before	he	finally got	to	the	caporegime	who	contacted	the	Tattaglia	chief.	By	that	time	Sonny Corleone	was	safely	back	in	the	mall,	in	his	father’s	house,	in	Long	Beach,	about to	face	his	father’s	wrath.
	
Chapter	17
	
																The	war	of	1947	between	the	Corleone	Family	and	the	Five	Families combined	against	them	proved	to	be	expensive	for	both	sides.	It	was complicated	by	the	police	pressure	put	on	everybody	to	solve	the	murder	of Captain	McCluskey.	It	was	rare	that	operating	officials	of	the	Police	Department ignored	political	muscle	that	protected	gambling	and	vice	operations,	but	in	this case	the	politicians	were	as	helpless	as	the	general	staff	of	a	rampaging,	looting
army	whose	field	officers	refuse	to	follow	orders.
																This	lack	of	protection	did	not	hurt	the	Corleone	Family	as	much	as	it did	their	opponents.	The	Corleone	group	depended	on	gambling	for	most	of	its income,	and	was	hit	especially	hard	in	its	“numbers”	or	“policy”	branch	of operations.	The	runners	who	picked	up	the	action	were	swept	into	police	nets and	usually	given	a	medium	shellacking	before	being	booked.	Even	some	of	the “banks”	were	located	and	raided,	with	heavy	financial	loss.	The	“bankers,”	.90 calibers	in	their	own	right,	complained	to	the	caporegimes,	who	brought	their complaints	to	the	family	council	table.	But	there	was	nothing	to	be	done.	The bankers	were	told	to	go	out	of	business.	Local	Negro	free-lancers	were	allowed to	take	over	the	operation	in	Harlem,	the	richest	territory,	and	they	operated	in such	scattered	fashion	that	the	police	found	it	hard	to	pin	them	down.
																After	the	death	of	Captain	McCluskey,	some	newspapers	printed stories	involving	him	with	Sollozzo.	They	published	proof	that	McCluskey	had received	large	sums	of	money	in	cash,	shortly	before	his	death.	These	stories	had been	planted	by	Hagen,	the	information	supplied	by	him.	The	Police	Department refused	to	confirm	or	deny	these	stories,	but	they	were	taking	effect.	The	police force	got	the	word	through	informers,	through	police	on	the	Family	payroll,	that McCluskey	had	been	a	rogue	cop.	Not	that	he	had	taken	money	or	clean	graft, there	was	no	rank-and-file	onus	to	that.	But	that	he	had	taken	the	dirtiest	of	dirty money;	murder	and	drugs	money.	And	in	the	morality	of	policemen,	this	was unforgivable.
																Hagen	understood	that	the	policeman	believes	in	law	and	order	in	a curiously	innocent	way.	He	believes	in	it	more	than	does	the	public	he	serves. Law	and	order	is,	after	all,	the	magic	from	which	he	derives	his	power, individual	power	which	he	cherishes	as	nearly	all	men	cherish	individual	power. And	yet	there	is	always	the	smoldering	resentment	against	the	public	he	serves. They	are	at	the	same	time	his	ward	and	his	prey.	As	wards	they	are	ungrateful, abusive	and	demanding.	As	prey	they	are	slippery	and	dangerous,	full	of	guile. As	soon	as	one	is	in	the	policeman’s	clutches	the	mechanism	of	the	society	the policeman	defends	marshals	all	its	resources	to	cheat	him	of	his	prize.	The	fix	is put	in	by	politicians.	Judges	give	lenient	suspended	sentences	to	the	worst hoodlums.	Governors	of	the	States	and	the	President	of	the	United	States	himself
give	full	pardons,	assuming	that	respected	lawyers	have	not	already	won	his acquittal.	After	a	time	the	cop	learns.	Why	should	he	not	collect	the	fees	these hoodlums	are	paying?	He	needs	it	more.	His	children,	why	should	they	not	go	to college?	Why	shouldn’t	his	wife	shop	in	more	expensive	places?	Why	shouldn’t he	himself	get	the	sun	with	a	winter	vacation	in	Florida?	After	all,	he	risks	his life	and	that	is	no	joke.
																But	usually	he	draws	the	line	against	accepting	dirty	graft.	He	will	take money	to	let	a	bookmaker	operate.	He	will	take	money	from	a	man	who	hates getting	parking	tickets	or	speeding	tickets.	He	will	allow	call	girls	and	prostitutes to	ply	their	trade;	for	a	consideration.	These	are	vices	natural	to	a	man.	But usually	he	will	not	take	a	payoff	for	drugs,	armed	robberies,	rape,	murder	and other	assorted	perversions.	In	his	mind	these	attack	the	very	core	of	his	personal authority	and	cannot	be	countenanced.
																The	murder	of	a	police	captain	was	comparable	to	regicide.	But	when it	became	known	that	McCluskey	had	been	killed	while	in	the	company	of	a notorious	narcotics	peddler,	when	it	became	known	that	he	was	suspected	of conspiracy	to	murder,	the	police	desire	for	vengeance	began	to	fade.	Also,	after all,	there	were	still	mortgage	payments	to	be	made,	cars	to	be	paid	off,	children to	be	launched	into	the	world.	Without	their	“sheet”	money,	policemen	had	to scramble	to	make	ends	meet.	Unlicensed	peddlers	were	good	for	lunch	money. Parking	ticket	payoffs	came	to	nickels	and	dimes.	Some	of	the	more	desperate even	began	shaking	down	suspects	(homosexuals,	assaults	and	batteries)	in	the precinct	squad	rooms.	Finally	the	brass	relented.	They	raised	the	prices	and	let the	Families	operate.	Once	again	the	payoff	sheet	was	typed	up	by	the	precinct bagman,	listing	every	man	assigned	to	the	local	station	and	what	his	cut	was each	month.	Some	semblance	of	social	order	was	restored.
	
																It	had	been	Hagen’s	idea	to	use	private	detectives	to	guard	Don Corleone’s	hospital	room.	These	were,	of	course,	supplemented	by	the	much more	formidable	soldiers	of	Tessio’s	regime.	But	Sonny	was	not	satisfied	even with	this.	By	the	middle	of	February,	when	the	Don	could	be	moved	without danger,	he	was	taken	by	ambulance	to	his	home	in	the	mall.	The	house	had	been
renovated	so	that	his	bedroom	was	now	a	hospital	room	with	all	equipment necessary	for	any	emergency.	Nurses	specially	recruited	and	checked	had	been hired	for	round-the-clock	care,	and	Dr.	Kennedy,	with	the	payment	of	a	huge fee,	had	been	persuaded	to	become	the	physician	in	residence	to	this	private hospital.	At	least	until	the	Don	would	need	only	nursing	care.
																The	mall	itself	was	made	impregnable.	Button	men	were	moved	into the	extra	houses,	the	tenants	sent	on	vacations	to	their	native	villages	in	Italy,	all expenses	paid.
																Freddie	Corleone	had	been	sent	to	Las	Vegas	to	recuperate	and	also	to scout	out	the	ground	for	a	Family	operation	in	the	luxury	hotel-gambling	casino complex	that	was	springing	up.	Las	Vegas	was	part	of	the	West	Coast	empire still	neutral	and	the	Don	of	that	empire	had	guaranteed	Freddie’s	safety	there. The	New	York	five	Families	had	no	desire	to	make	more	enemies	by	going	into Vegas	after	Freddie	Corleone.	They	had	enough	trouble	on	their	hands	in	New York.
																Dr.	Kennedy	had	forbade	any	discussion	of	business	in	front	of	the Don.	This	edict	was	completely	disregarded.	The	Don	insisted	on	the	council	of war	being	held	in	his	room.	Sonny,	Tom	Hagen,	Pete	Clemenza	and	Tessio gathered	there	the	very	first	night	of	his	homecoming.
																Don	Corleone	was	too	weak	to	speak	much	but	he	wished	to	listen	and exercise	veto	powers.	When	it	was	explained	that	Freddie	had	been	sent	to	Las Vegas	to	learn	the	gambling	casino	business	he	nodded	his	head	approvingly. When	he	learned	that	Bruno	Tattaglia	had	been	killed	by	Corleone	button	men he	shook	his	head	and	sighed.	But	what	distressed	him	most	of	all	was	learning that	Michael	had	killed	Sollozzo	and	Captain	McCluskey	and	had	then	been forced	to	flee	to	Sicily.	When	he	heard	this	he	motioned	them	out	and	they continued	the	conference	in	the	corner	room	that	held	the	law	library.
																Sonny	Corleone	relaxed	in	the	huge	armchair	behind	the	desk.	“I	think we’d	better	let	the	old	man	take	it	easy	for	a	couple	of	weeks,	until	the	doc	says he	can	do	business.”	He	paused.	“I’d	like	to	have	it	going	again	before	he	gets better.	We	have	the	go-ahead	from	the	cops	to	operate.	The	first	thing	is	the
policy	banks	in	Harlem.	The	black	boys	up	there	had	their	fun,	now	we	have	to take	it	back.	They	screwed	up	the	works	but	good,	just	like	they	usually	do	when they	run	things.	A	lot	of	their	runners	didn’t	payoff	winners.	They	drive	up	in Cadillacs	and	tell	their	players	they	gotta	wait	for	their	dough	or	maybe	just	pay them	half	what	they	win.	I	don’t	want	any	runner	looking	rich	to	his	players.	I don’t	want	them	dressing	too	good.	I	don’t	want	them	driving	new	cars.	I	don’t want	them	welching	on	paying	a	winner.	And	I	don’t	want	any	free-lancers staying	in	business,	they	give	us	a	bad	name.	Tom,	let’s	get	that	project	moving right	away.	Everything	else	will	fall	in	line	as	soon	as	you	send	out	the	word	that the	lid	is	off.”
																Hagen	said,	“There	are	some	very	tough	boys	up	in	Harlem.	They	got a	taste	of	the	big	money.	They	won’t	go	back	to	being	runners	or	sub-bankers again.”
																Sonny	shrugged.	“Just	give	their	names	to	Clemenza.	That’s	his	job; straightening	them	out.”
																Clemenza	said	to	Hagen,	“No	problem.”
																It	was	Tessio	who	brought	up	the	most	important	question.	“Once	we start	operating,	the	five	Families	start	their	raids.	They’ll	hit	our	bankers	in Harlem	and	out	bookmakers	on	the	East	Side.	They	may	even	try	to	make	things tough	for	the	garment	center	outfits	we	service.	This	war	is	going	to	cost	a	lot	of money.”
																“Maybe	they	won’t,”	Sonny	said.	“They	know	we’ll	hit	them	right back.	I’ve	got	peace	feelers	out	and	maybe	we	can	settle	everything	by	paying	an indemnity	for	the	Tattaglia	kid.”
																Hagen	said,	“We’re	getting	the	cold	shoulder	on	those	negotiations. They	lost	a	lot	of	dough	the	last	few	months	and	they	blame	us	for	it.	With justice.	I	think	what	they	want	is	for	us	to	agree	to	come	in	on	the	narcotics trade,	to	use	the	Family	influence	politically.	In	other	words,	Sollozzo’s	deal minus	Sollozzo.	But	they	won’t	broach	that	until	they’ve	hurt	us	with	some	sort of	combat	action.	Then	after	we’ve	been	softened	up	they	figure	we’ll	listen	to	a
proposition	on	narcotics.”
																Sonny	said	curtly,	“No	deal	on	drugs.	The	Don	said	no	and	it’s	no	until he	changes	it.”
																Hagen	said	briskly,	“Then	we’re	faced	with	a	tactical	problem.	Our money	is	out	in	the	open.	Bookmaking	and	policy.	We	can	be	hit.	But	the Tattaglia	Family	has	prostitution	and	call	girls	and	the	dock	unions.	How	the	hell are	we	going	to	hit	them?	The	other	Families	are	in	some	gambling.	But	most	of them	are	in	the	construction	trades,	shylocking,	controlling	the	unions,	getting the	government	contracts.	They	get	a	lot	from	strong-arm	and	other	stuff	that involves	innocent	people.	Their	money	isn’t	out	in	the	street.	The	Tattaglia nightclub	is	too	famous	to	touch	it,	it	would	cause	too	much	of	a	stink.	And	with the	Don	still	out	of	action	their	political	influence	matches	ours.	So	we’ve	got	a real	problem	here.”
																“It’s	my	problem,	Tom,”	Sonny	said.	“I’ll	find	the	answer.	Keep	the negotiation	alive	and	follow	through	on	the	other	stuff.	Let’s	go	back	into business	and	see	what	happens.	Then	we’ll	take	it	from	there.	Clemenza	and Tessio	have	plenty	of	soldiers,	we	can	match	the	whole	Five	Families	gun	for gun	if	that’s	the	way	they	want	it.	We’ll	just	go	to	the	mattresses._€__te	
																There	was	no	problem	getting	the	free-lance	Negro	bankers	out	of business.	The	police	were	informed	and	cracked	down.	With	a	special	effort.	At that	time	it	was	not	possible	for	a	Negro	to	make	a	payoff	to	a	high	police	or political	official	to	keep	such	an	operation	going.	This	was	due	to	racial prejudice	and	racial	distrust	more	than	anything	else.	But	Harlem	had	always been	considered	a	minor	problem,	and	its	settlement	was	expected.
																The	Five	Families	struck	in	an	unexpected	direction.	Two	powerful officials	in	the	garment	unions	were	killed,	officials	who	were	members	of	the Corleone	Family.	Then	the	Corleone	Family	shylocks	were	barred	from	the waterfront	piers	as	were	the	Corleone	Family	bookmakers.	The	longshoremen’s union	locals	had	gone	over	to	the	Five	Families.	Corleone	bookmakers	all	over the	city	were	threatened	to	persuade	them	to	change	their	allegiance.	The	biggest numbers	banker	in	Harlem,	an	old	friend	and	ally	of	the	Corleone	Family,	was
brutally	murdered.	There	was	no	longer	any	option.	Sonny	told	his	caporegimes to	go	to	the	mattresses.
																Two	apartments	were	set	up	in	the	city	and	furnished	with	mattresses for	the	button	men	to	sleep	on,	a	refrigerator	for	food,	and	guns	and	ammunition. Clemenza	staffed	one	apartment	and	Tessio	the	other.	All	Family	bookmakers were	given	bodyguard	teams.	The	policy	bankers	in	Harlem,	however,	had	gone over	to	the	enemy	and	at	the	moment	nothing	could	be	done	about	that.	All	this cost	the	Corleone	Family	a	great	deal	of	money	and	very	little	was	coming	in.	As the	next	few	months	went	by,	other	things	became	obvious.	The	most	important was	that	the	Corleone	Family	had	overmatched	itself.
																There	were	reasons	for	this.	With	the	Don	still	too	weak	to	take	a	part, a	great	deal	of	the	Family’s	political	strength	was	neutralized.	Also,	the	last	ten years	of	peace	had	seriously	eroded	the	fighting	qualities	of	the	two caporegimes,	Clemenza	and	Tessio.	Clemenza	was	still	a	competent	executioner and	administrator	but	he	no	longer	had	the	energy	or	the	youthful	strength	to lead	troops.	Tessio	had	mellowed	with	age	and	was	not	ruthless	enough.	Tom Hagen,	despite	his	abilities,	was	simply	not	suited	to	be	a	Consigliere	in	a	time of	war.	His	main	fault	was	that	he	was	not	a	Sicilian.
																Sonny	Corleone	recognized	these	weaknesses	in	the	Family’s	wartime posture	but	could	not	take	any	steps	to	remedy	them.	He	was	not	the	Don	and only	the	Don	could	replace	the	caporegimes	and	the	Consigliere.	And	the	very act	of	replacement	would	make	the	situation	more	dangerous,	might	precipitate some	treachery.	At	first,	Sonny	had	thought	of	fighting	a	holding	action	until	the Don	could	become	well	enough	to	take	charge,	but	with	the	defection	of	the policy	bankers,	the	terrorization	of	the	bookmakers,	the	Family	position	was becoming	precarious.	He	decided	to	strike	back.
																But	he	decided	to	strike	right	at	the	heart	of	the	enemy.	He	planned	the execution	of	the	heads	of	the	five	Families	in	one	grand	tactical	maneuver.	To that	purpose	he	put	into	effect	an	elaborate	system	of	surveillance	of	these leaders.	But	after	a	week	the	enemy	chiefs	promptly	dived	underground	and were	seen	no	more	in	public.
																The	Five	Families	and	the	Corleone	Empire	were	in	stalemate.
	
Chapter	18
	
																Amerigo	Bonasera	lived	only	a	few	blocks	from	his	undertaking establishment	on	Mulberry	Street	and	so	always	went	home	for	supper.	Evenings he	returned	to	his	place	of	business,	dutifully	joining	those	mourners	paying their	respects	to	the	dead	who	lay	in	state	in	his	somber	parlors.
																He	always	resented	the	jokes	made	about	his	profession,	the	macabre technical	details	which	were	so	unimportant.	Of	course	none	of	his	friends	or family	or	neighbors	would	make	such	jokes.	Any	profession	was	worthy	of respect	to	men	who	for	centuries	earned	bread	by	the	sweat	of	their	brows.
																Now	at	supper	with	his	wife	in	their	solidly	furnished	apartment,	gilt statues	of	the	Virgin	Mary	with	their	red-glassed	candles	flickering	on	the sideboard,	Bonasera	lit	a	Camel	cigarette	and	took	a	relaxing	glass	of	American whiskey.	His	wife	brought	steaming	plates	of	soup	to	the	table.	The	two	of	them were	alone	now;	he	had	sent	his	daughter	to	live	in	Boston	with	her	mother’s sister,	where	she	could	forget	her	terrible	experience	and	her	injuries	at	the	hands of	the	two	ruffians	Don	Corleone	had	punished.
																As	they	ate	their	soup	his	wife	asked,	“Are	you	going	back	to	work tonight?”
																Amerigo	Bonasera	nodded.	His	wife	respected	his	work	but	did	not understand	it.	She	did	not	understand	that	the	technical	part	of	his	profession	was the	least	important.	She	thought,	like	most	other	people,	that	he	was	paid	for	his skill	in	making	the	dead	look	so	lifelike	in	their	coffins.	And	indeed	his	skill	in this	was	legendary.	But	even	more	important,	even	more	necessary	was	his physical	presence	at	the	wake.	When	the	bereaved	family	came	at	night	to receive	their	blood	relatives	and	their	friends	beside	the	coffin	of	their	loved	one,
they	needed	Amerigo	Bonasera	with	them.
																For	he	was	a	strict	chaperone	to	death.	His	face	always	grave,	yet strong	and	comforting,	his	voice	unwavering,	yet	muted	to	a	low	register,	he commanded	the	mourning	ritual.	He	could	quiet	grief	that	was	too	unseemly,	he could	rebuke	unruly	children	whose	parents	had	not	the	heart	to	chastise.	Never cloying	in	the	tender	of	his	condolences,	yet	never	was	he	offhand.	Once	a family	used	Amerigo	Bonasera	to	speed	a	loved	one	on,	they	came	back	to	him again	and	again.	And	he	never,	never,	deserted	one	of	his	clients	on	that	terrible last	night	above	ground.
																Usually	he	allowed	himself	a	little	nap	after	supper.	Then	he	washed and	shaved	afresh,	talcum	powder	generously	used	to	shroud	the	heavy	black beard.	A	mouthwash	always.	He	respectfully	changed	into	fresh	linen,	white gleaming	shirt,	the	black	tie,	a	freshly	pressed	dark	suit,	dull	black	shoes	and black	socks.	And	yet	the	effect	was	comforting	instead	of	somber.	He	also	kept his	hair	dyed	black,	an	unheard-of	frivolity	in	an	Italian	male	of	his	generation; but	not	out	of	vanity.	Simply	because	his	hair	had	turned	a	lively	pepper	and	salt, a	color	which	struck	him	as	unseemly	for	his	profession.
																After	he	finished	his	soup,	his	wife	placed	a	small	steak	before	him with	a	few	forkfuls	of	green	spinach	oozing	yellow	oil.	He	was	a	light	eater. When	he	finished	this	he	drank	a	cup	of	coffee	and	smoked	another	Camel cigarette.	Over	his	coffee	he	thought	about	his	poor	daughter.	She	would	never be	the	same.	Her	outward	beauty	had	been	restored	but	there	was	the	look	of	a frightened	animal	in	her	eyes	that	had	made	him	unable	to	bear	the	sight	of	her. And	so	they	had	sent	her	to	live	in	Boston	for	a	time.	Time	would	heal	her wounds.	Pain	and	terror	was	not	so	final	as	death,	as	he	well	knew.	His	work made	him	an	optimist.
																He	had	just	finished	the	coffee	when	his	phone	in	the	living	room	rang. His	wife	never	answered	it	when	he	was	home,	so	he	got	up	and	drained	his	cup and	stubbed	out	his	cigarette.	As	he	walked	to	the	phone	he	pulled	off	his	tie	and started	to	unbutton	his	shirt,	getting	ready	for	his	little	nap.	Then	he	picked	up the	phone	and	said	with	quiet	courtesy,	“Hello.”