		He	paused.	None	of	the	others	spoke.	Some	were	smoking	cigars, others	sipping	their	drinks.	All	of	these	men	were	good	listeners,	patient	men. They	had	one	other	thing	in	common.	They	were	those	rarities,	men	who	had refused	to	accept	the	rule	of	organized	society,	men	who	refused	the	dominion	of other	men.	There	was	no	force,	no	mortal	man	who	could	bend	them	to	their	will unless	they	wished	it.	They	were	men	who	guarded	their	free	will	with	wiles	and murder.	Their	wills	could	be	subverted	only	by	death.	Or	the	utmost reasonableness.
																Don	Corleone	sighed.	“How	did	things	ever	go	so	far?”	he	asked rhetorically.	“Well,	no	matter.	A	lot	of	foolishness	has	come	to	pass.	It	was	so unfortunate,	so	unnecessary.	But	let	me	tell	what	happened,	as	I	see	it.”
																He	paused	to	see	if	someone	would	object	to	his	telling	his	side	of	the story.
																“Thank	God	my	health	has	been	restored	and	maybe	I	can	help	set	this affair	aright.	Perhaps	my	son	was	too	rash,	too	headstrong,	I	don’t	say	no	to	that. Anyway	let	me	just	say	that	Sollozzo	came	to	me	with	a	business	affair	in	which he	asked	me	for	my	money	and	my	influence.	He	said	he	had	the	interest	of	the Tattaglia	Family.	The	affair	involved	drugs,	in	which	I	have	no	interest.	I’m	a quiet	man	and	such	endeavors	are	too	lively	for	my	taste.	I	explained	this	to Sollozzo,	with	all	respect	for	him	and	the	Tattaglia	Family.	I	gave	him	my	‘no’ with	all	courtesy.	I	told	him	his	business	would	not	interfere	with	mine,	that	I had	no	objection	to	his	earning	his	living	in	this	fashion.	He	took	it	ill	and brought	misfortune	down	on	all	our	heads.	Well,	that’s	life.	Everyone	here	could tell	his	own	tale	of	sorrow.	That’s	not	to	my	purpose.”
																Don	Corleone	paused	and	motioned	to	Hagen	for	a	cold	drink,	which Hagen	swiftly	furnished	him.	Don	Corleone	wet	his	mouth.	“I’m	willing	to	make the	peace,”	he	said.	“Tattaglia	has	lost	a	son,	I	have	lost	a	son.	We	are	quits. What	would	the	world	come	to	if	people	kept	carrying	grudges	against	all reason?	That	has	been	the	cross	of	Sicily,	where	men	are	so	busy	with	vendettas they	have	no	time	to	earn	bread	for	their	families.	It’s	foolishness.	So	I	say	now, let	things	be	as	they	were	before.	I	have	not	taken	any	steps	to	learn	who betrayed	and	killed	my	son.	Given	peace,	I	will	not	do	so.	I	have	a	son	who
cannot	come	home	and	I	must	receive	assurances	that	when	I	arrange	matters	so that	he	can	return	safely	that	there	will	be	no	interference,	no	danger	from	the authorities.	Once	that’s	settled	maybe	we	can	talk	about	other	matters	that interest	us	and	do	ourselves,	all	of	us,	a	profitable	service	today.”	Corleone gestured	expressively,	submissively,	with	his	hands.	“That	is	all	I	want.”
																It	was	very	well	done.	It	was	the	Don	Corleone	of	old.	Reasonable. Pliant.	Soft-spoken.	But	every	man	there	had	noted	that	he	had	claimed	good health,	which	meant	he	was	a	man	not	to	be	held	cheaply	despite	the	misfortunes of	the	Corleone	Family.	It	was	noted	that	he	had	said	the	discussion	of	other business	was	useless	until	the	peace	he	asked	for	was	given.	It	was	noted	that	he had	asked	for	the	old	status	quo,	that	he	would	lose	nothing	despite	his	having got	the	worst	of	it	over	the	past	year.
																However,	it	was	Emilio	Barzini	who	answered	Don	Corleone,	not Tattaglia.	He	was	curt	and	to	the	point	without	being	rude	or	insulting.
																“That	is	all	true	enough,”	Barzini	said.	“But	there’s	a	little	more.	Don Corleone	is	too	modest.	The	fact	is	that	Sollozzo	and	the	Tattaglias	could	not	go into	their	new	business	without	the	assistance	of	Don	Corleone.	In	fact,	his disapproval	injured	them.	That’s	not	his	fault	of	course.	The	fact	remains	that judges	and	politicians	who	would	accept	favors	from	Don	Corleone,	even	on drugs,	would	not	allow	themselves	to	be	influenced	by	anybody	else	when	it came	to	narcotics.	Sollozzo	couldn’t	operate	if	he	didn’t	have	some	insurance	of his	people	being	treated	gently.	We	all	know	that.	We	would	all	be	poor	men otherwise.	And	now	that	they	have	increased	the	penalties	the	judges	and	the prosecuting	attorneys	drive	a	hard	bargain	when	one	of	our	people	get	in	trouble with	narcotics.	Even	a	Sicilian	sentenced	to	twenty	years	might	break	the	omerta and	talk	his	brains	out.	That	can’t	happen.	Don	Corleone	controls	all	that apparatus.	His	refusal	to	let	us	use	it	is	not	the	act	of	a	friend.	He	takes	the	bread out	of	the	mouths	of	our	families.	Times	have	changed,	it’s	not	like	the	old	days where	everyone	can	go	his	own	way.	If	Corleone	had	all	the	judges	in	New York,	then	he	must	share	them	or	let	us	others	use	them.	Certainly	he	can	present a	bill	for	such	services,	we’re	not	communists,	after	all.	But	he	has	to	let	us	draw water	from	the	well.	It’s	that	simple.”
																When	Barzini	had	finished	talking	there	was	a	silence.	The	lines	were now	drawn,	there	could	be	no	return	to	the	old	status	quo.	What	was	more important	was	that	Barzini	by	speaking	out	was	saying	that	if	peace	was	not made	he	would	openly	join	the	Tattaglia	in	their	war	against	the	Corleone.	And he	had	scored	a	telling	point.	Their	lives	and	their	fortunes	depended	upon	their doing	each	other	services,	the	denial	of	a	favor	asked	by	a	friend	was	an	act	of aggression.	Favors	were	not	asked	lightly	and	so	could	not	be	lightly	refused.
																Don	Corleone	finally	spoke	to	answer.	“My	friends,”	he	said,	“I	didn’t refuse	out	of	spite.	You	all	know	me.	When	have	I	ever	refused	an accommodation?	That’s	simply	not	in	my	nature.	But	I	had	to	refuse	this	time. Why?	Because	I	think	this	drug	business	will	destroy	us	in	the	years	to	come. There	is	too	much	strong	feeling	about	such	traffic	in	this	country.	It’s	not	like whiskey	or	gambling	or	even	women	which	most	people	want	and	is	forbidden them	by	the	pezzonovante	of	the	church	and	the	government.	But	drugs	are dangerous	for	everyone	connected	with	them.	It	could	jeopardize	all	other business.	And	let	me	say	I’m	flattered	by	the	belief	that	I	am	so	powerful	with the	judges	and	law	officials,	I	wish	it	were	true.	I	do	have	some	influence	but many	of	the	people	who	respect	my	counsel	might	lose	this	respect	if	drugs become	involved	in	our	relationship.	They	are	afraid	to	be	involved	in	such business	and	they	have	strong	feelings	about	it.	Even	policemen	who	help	us	in gambling	and	other	things	would	refuse	to	help	us	in	drugs.	So	to	ask	me	to perform	a	service	in	these	matters	is	to	ask	me	to	do	a	disservice	to	myself.	But I’m	willing	to	do	even	that	if	all	of	you	think	it	proper	in	order	to	adjust	other matters.”
																When	Don	Corleone	had	finished	speaking	the	room	became	much more	relaxed	with	more	whisperings	and	cross	talk.	He	had	conceded	the important	point.	He	would	offer	his	protection	to	any	organized	business	venture in	drugs.	He	was,	in	effect,	agreeing	almost	entirely	to	Sollozzo’s	original proposal	if	that	proposal	was	endorsed	by	the	national	group	gathered	here.	It was	understood	that	he	would	never	participate	in	the	operational	phase,	nor would	he	invest	his	money.	He	would	merely	use	his	protective	influence	with the	legal	apparatus.	But	this	was	a	formidable	concession.
																The	Don	of	Los	Angeles,	Frank	Falcone,	spoke	to	answer.	“There’s	no
way	of	stopping	our	people	from	going	into	that	business.	They	go	in	on	their own	and	they	get	in	trouble.	There’s	too	much	money	in	it	to	resist.	So	it’s	more dangerous	if	we	don’t	go	in.	At	least	if	we	control	it	we	can	cover	it	better, organize	it	better,	make	sure	it	causes	less	trouble.	Being	in	it	is	not	so	bad,	there has	to	be	control,	there	has	to	be	protection,	there	has	to	be	organization,	we can’t	have	everybody	running	around	doing	just	what	they	please	like	a	bunch	of anarchists.”
																The	Don	of	Detroit,	more	friendly	to	Corleone	than	any	of	the	others, also	now	spoke	against	his	friend’s	position,	in	the	interest	of	reasonableness.	“I don’t	believe	in	drugs,”	he	said.	“For	years	I	paid	my	people	extra	so	they wouldn’t	do	that	kind	of	business.	But	it	didn’t	matter,	it	didn’t	help.	Somebody comes	to	them	and	says,	‘I	have	powders,	if	you	put	up	the	three--,	fourthousand-dollar	investment	we	can	make	fifty	thousand	distributing.	‘	Who	can resist	such	a	profit?	And	they	are	so	busy	with	their	little	side	business	they neglect	the	work	I	pay	them	to	do.	There’s	more	money	in	drugs.	It’s	getting bigger	all	the	time.	There’s	no	way	to	stop	it	so	we	have	to	control	the	business and	keep	it	respectable.	I	don’t	want	any	of	it	near	schools,	I	don’t	want	any	of	it sold	to	children.	That	is	an	infamita.	In	my	city	I	would	try	to	keep	the	traffic	in the	dark	people,	the	colored.	They	are	the	best	customers,	the	least	troublesome and	they	are	animals	anyway.	They	have	no	respect	for	their	wives	or	their families	or	for	themselves.	Let	them	lose	their	souls	with	drugs.	But	something has	to	be	done,	we	just	can’t	let	people	do	as	they	please	and	make	trouble	for everyone.”
																This	speech	of	the	Detroit	Don	was	received	with	loud	murmurs	of approval.	He	had	hit	the	nail	on	the	head.	You	couldn’t	even	pay	people	to	stay out	of	the	drug	traffic.	As	for	his	remarks	about	children,	that	was	his	wellknown	sensibility,	his	tenderheartedness	speaking.	After	all,	who	would	sell drugs	to	children?	Where	would	children	get	the	money?	As	for	his	remarks about	the	coloreds,	that	was	not	even	heard.	The	Negroes	were	considered	of absolutely	no	account,	of	no	force	whatsoever.	That	they	had	allowed	society	to grind	them	into	the	dust	proved	them	of	no	account	and	his	mentioning	them	in any	way	proved	that	the	Don	of	Detroit	had	a	mind	that	always	wavered	toward irrelevancies.
																All	the	Dons	spoke.	All	of	them	deplored	the	traffic	in	drugs	as	a	bad thing	that	would	cause	trouble	but	agreed	there	was	no	way	to	control	it.	There was,	simply,	too	much	money	to	be	made	in	the	business,	therefore	it	followed that	there	would	be	men	who	would	dare	anything	to	dabble	in	it.	That	was human	nature.
																It	was	finally	agreed.	Drug	traffic	would	be	permitted	and	Don Corleone	must	give	it	some	legal	protection	in	the	East.	It	was	understood	that the	Barzini	and	Tattaglia	Families	would	do	most	of	the	large-scale	operations. With	this	out	of	the	way	the	conference	was	able	to	move	on	to	other	matters	of a	wider	interest.	There	were	many	complex	problems	to	be	solved.	It	was	agreed that	Las	Vegas	and	Miami	were	to	be	open	cities	where	any	of	the	Families could	operate.	They	all	recognized	that	these	were	the	cities	of	the	future.	It	was also	agreed	that	no	violence	would	be	permitted	in	these	cities	and	that	petty criminals	of	all	types	were	to	be	discouraged.	It	was	agreed	that	in	momentous affairs,	in	executions	that	were	necessary	but	might	cause	too	much	of	a	public outcry,	the	execution	must	be	approved	by	this	council.	It	was	agreed	that	button men	and	other	soldiers	were	to	be	restrained	from	violent	crimes	and	acts	of vengeance	against	each	other	on	personal	matters.	It	was	agreed	that	Families would	do	each	other	services	when	requested,	such	as	providing	executioners, technical	assistance	in	pursuing	certain	courses	of	action	such	as	bribing	jurors, which	in	some	instances	could	be	vital.	These	discussions,	informal,	colloquial and	on	a	high	level,	took	time	and	were	broken	by	lunch	and	drinks	from	the buffet	bar.
																Finally	Don	Barzini	sought	to	bring	the	meeting	to	an	end.	“That’s	the whole	matter	then,”	he	said.	“We	have	the	peace	and	let	me	pay	my	respects	to Don	Corleone,	whom	we	all	have	known	over	the	years	as	a	man	of	his	word.	If there	are	any	more	differences	we	can	meet	again,	we	need	not	become	foolish again.	On	my	part	the	road	is	new	and	fresh.	I’m	glad	this	is	all	settled.”
																Only	Phillip	Tattaglia	was	a	little	worried	still.	The	murder	of	Santino Corleone	made	him	the	most	vulnerable	person	in	this	group	if	war	broke	out again.	He	spoke	at	length	for	the	first	time.
																“I’ve	agreed	to	everything	here,	I’m	willing	to	forget	my	own
misfortune.	But	I	would	like	to	hear	some	strict	assurances	from	Corleone.	Will he	attempt	any	individual	vengeance?	When	time	goes	by	and	his	position perhaps	becomes	stronger,	will	he	forget	that	we	have	sworn	our	friendship? How	am	I	to	know	that	in	three	or	four	years	he	won’t	feel	that	he’s	been	ill served,	forced	against	his	will	to	this	agreement	and	so	free	to	break	it?	Will	we have	to	guard	against	each	other	all	the	time?	Or	can	we	truly	go	in	peace	with peace	of	mind?	Would	Corleone	give	us	all	his	assurances	as	I	now	give	mine?”
																It	was	then	that	Don	Corleone	gave	the	speech	that	would	be	long remembered,	and	that	reaffirmed	his	position	as	the	most	far-seeing	statesman among	them,	so	full	of	common	sense,	so	direct	from	the	heart;	and	to	the	heart of	the	matter.	In	it	he	coined	a	phrase	that	was	to	become	as	famous	in	its	way	as Churchill’s	Iron	Curtain,	though	not	public	knowledge	until	more	than	ten	years later.
																For	the	first	time	he	stood	up	to	address	the	council.	He	was	short	and a	little	thin	from	his	“illness,”	perhaps	his	sixty	years	showed	a	bit	more	but there	was	no	question	that	he	had	regained	all	his	former	strength,	and	had	all	his wits.
																“What	manner	of	men	are	we	then,	if	we	do	not	have	our	reason,”	he said.	“We	are	all	no	better	than	beasts	in	a	jungle	if	that	were	the	case.	But	we have	reason,	we	can	reason	with	each	other	and	we	can	reason	with	ourselves. To	what	purpose	would	I	start	all	these	troubles	again,	the	violence	and	the turmoil?	My	son	is	dead	and	that	is	a	misfortune	and	I	must	bear	it,	not	make	the innocent	world	around	me	suffer	with	me.	And	so	I	say,	I	give	my	honor,	that	I will	never	seek	vengeance,	I	will	never	seek	knowledge	of	the	deeds	that	have been	done	in	the	past.	I	will	leave	here	with	a	pure	heart.
																“Let	me	say	that	we	must	always	look	to	our	interests.	We	are	all	men who	have	refused	to	be	fools,	who	have	refused	to	be	puppets	dancing	on	a string	pulled	by	the	men	on	high.	We	have	been	fortunate	here	in	this	country. Already	most	of	our	children	have	found	a	better	life.	Some	of	you	have	sons who	are	professors,	scientists,	musicians,	and	you	are	fortunate.	Perhaps	your grandchildren	will	become	the	new	pezzonovanti.	None	of	us	here	want	to	see our	children	follow	in	our	footsteps,	it’s	too	hard	a	life.	They	can	be	as	others,
their	position	and	security	won	by	our	courage.	I	have	grandchildren	now	and	I hope	their	children	may	someday,	who	knows,	be	a	governor,	a	President, nothing’s	impossible	here	in	America.	But	we	have	to	progress	with	the	times. The	time	is	past	for	guns	and	killings	and	massacres.	We	have	to	be	cunning	like the	business	people,	there’s	more	money	in	it	and	it’s	better	for	our	children	and our	grandchildren.
																“As	for	our	own	deeds,	we	are	not	responsible	to	the	.90	calibers	the pezzonovantis	who	take	it	upon	themselves	to	decide	what	we	shall	do	with	our lives,	who	declare	wars	they	wish	us	to	fight	in	to	protect	what	they	own.	Who	is to	say	we	should	obey	the	laws	they	make	for	their	own	interest	and	to	our	hurt? And	who	are	they	then	to	meddle	when	we	look	after	our	own	interests?	Sonna cosa	nostra,	“	Don	Corleone	said,	“these	are	our	own	affairs.	We	will	manage our	world	for	ourselves	because	it	is	our	world,	cosa	nostra.	And	so	we	have	to stick	together	to	guard	against	outside	meddlers.	Otherwise	they	will	put	the	ring in	our	nose	as	they	have	put	the	ring	in	the	nose	of	all	the	millions	of Neapolitans	and	other	Italians	in	this	country.
																“For	this	reason	I	forgo	my	vengeance	for	my	dead	son,	for	the common	good.	I	swear	now	that	as	long	as	I	am	responsible	for	the	actions	of my	Family	there	will	not	be	one	finger	lifted	against	any	man	here	without	just cause	and	utmost	provocation.	I	am	willing	to	sacrifice	my	commercial	interests for	the	common	good.	This	is	my	word,	this	is	my	honor,	there	are	those	of	you here	who	know	I	have	never	betrayed	either.
																“But	I	have	a	selfish	interest.	My	youngest	son	had	to	flee,	accused	of Sollozzo’s	murder	and	that	of	a	police	captain.	I	must	now	make	arrangements so	that	he	can	come	home	with	safety,	cleared	of	all	those	false	charges.	That	is my	affair	and	I	will	make	those	arrangements.	I	must	find	the	real	culprits perhaps,	or	perhaps	I	must	convince	the	authorities	of	his	innocence,	perhaps	the witnesses	and	informants	will	recant	their	lies.	But	again	I	say	that	this	is	my affair	and	I	believe	I	will	be	able	to	bring	my	son	home.
																“But	let	me	say	this.	I	am	a	superstitious	man,	a	ridiculous	failing	but	I must	confess	it	here.	And	so	if	some	unlucky	accident	should	befall	my	youngest son,	if	some	police	officer	should	accidentally	shoot	him,	if	he	should	hang
himself	in	his	cell,	if	new	witnesses	appear	to	testify	to	his	guilt,	my	superstition will	make	me	feel	that	it	was	the	result	of	the	ill	will	still	borne	me	by	some people	here.	Let	me	go	further.	If	my	son	is	struck	by	a	bolt	of	lightning	I	will blame	some	of	the	people	here.	If	his	plane	should	fall	into	the	sea	or	his	ship sink	beneath	the	waves	of	the	ocean,	if	he	should	catch	a	mortal	fever,	if	his automobile	should	be	struck	by	a	train,	such	is	my	superstition	that	I	would blame	the	ill	will	felt	by	people	here.	Gentlemen,	that	ill	will,	that	bad	luck,	I could	never	forgive.	But	aside	from	that	let	me	swear	by	the	souls	of	my grandchildren	that	I	will	never	break	the	peace	we	have	made.	After	all,	are	we or	are	we	not	better	men	than	those	pezzonovanti	who	have	killed	countless millions	of	men	in	our	lifetimes?”
																With	this	Don	Corleone	stepped	from	his	place	and	went	down	the table	to	where	Don	Phillip	Tattaglia	was	sitting.	Tattaglia	rose	to	greet	him	and the	two	men	embraced,	kissing	each	other’s	cheeks.	The	other	Dons	in	the	room applauded	and	rose	to	shake	hands	with	everybody	in	sight	and	to	congratulate Don	Corleone	and	Don	Tattaglia	on	their	new	friendship.	It	was	not	perhaps	the warmest	friendship	in	the	world,	they	would	not	send	each	other	Christmas	gift greetings,	but	they	would	not	murder	each	other.	That	was	friendship	enough	in this	world,	all	that	was	needed.
																Since	his	son	Freddie	was	under	the	protection	of	the	Molinari	Family in	the	West,	Don	Corleone	lingered	with	the	San	Francisco	Don	after	the meeting	to	thank	him.	Molinari	said	enough	for	Don	Corleone	to	gather	that Freddie	had	found	his	niche	out	there,	was	happy	and	had	become	something	of a	ladies’	man.	He	had	a	genius	for	running	a	hotel,	it	seemed.	Don	Corleone shook	his	head	in	wonder,	as	many	fathers	do	when	told	of	undreamed-of	talents in	their	children.	Wasn’t	it	true	that	sometimes	the	greatest	misfortunes	brought unforeseen	rewards?	They	both	agreed	that	this	was	so.	Meanwhile	Corleone made	it	clear	to	the	San	Francisco	Don	that	he	was	in	his	debt	for	the	great service	done	in	protecting	Freddie.	He	let	it	be	known	that	his	influence	would be	exerted	so	that	the	important	racing	wires	would	always	be	available	to	his people	no	matter	what	changes	occurred	in	the	power	structure	in	the	years	to come,	an	important	guarantee	since	the	struggle	over	this	facility	was	a	constant open	wound	complicated	by	the	fact	that	the	Chicago	people	had	their	heavy hand	in	it.	But	Don	Corleone	was	not	without	influence	even	in	that	land	of barbarians	and	so	his	promise	was	a	gift	of	gold.
																It	was	evening	before	Don	Corleone,	Tom	Hagen	and	the	bodyguardchauffeur,	who	happened	to	be	Rocco	Lampone,	arrived	at	the	mall	in	Long Beach.	When	they	went	into	the	house	the	Don	said	to	Hagen,	“Our	driver,	that man	Lampone,	keep	an	eye	on	him.	He’s	a	fellow	worth	something	better	I think.”	Hagen	wondered	at	this	remark.	Lampone	had	not	said	a	word	all	day, had	not	even	glanced	at	the	two	men	in	the	back	seat.	He	had	opened	the	door for	the	Don,	the	car	had	been	in	front	of	the	bank	when	they	emerged,	he	had done	everything	correctly	but	no	more	than	any	well-trained	chauffeur	might	do. Evidently	the	Don’s	eye	had	seen	something	he	had	not	seen.
																The	Don	dismissed	Hagen	and	told	him	to	come	back	to	the	house after	supper.	But	to	take	his	time	and	rest	a	little	since	they	would	put	in	a	long night	of	discussion.	He	also	told	Hagen	to	have	Clemenza	and	Tessio	present. They	should	come	at	ten	P.M.,	not	before.	Hagen	was	to	brief	Clemenza	and Tessio	on	what	had	happened	at	the	meeting	that	afternoon.
																At	ten	the	Don	was	waiting	for	the	three	men	in	his	office,	the	corner room	of	the	house	with	its	law	library	and	special	phone.	There	was	a	tray	with whiskey	bottles,	ice	and	soda	water.	The	Don	gave	his	instructions.
																“We	made	the	peace	this	afternoon,”	he	said.	“I	gave	my	word	and	my honor	and	that	should	be	enough	for	all	of	you.	But	our	friends	are	not	so trustworthy	so	let’s	all	be	on	our	guard	still.	We	don’t	want	any	more	nasty	little surprises.”	Then	Don	turned	to	Hagen.	“You’ve	let	the	Bocchicchio	hostages go?”
																Hagen	nodded.	“I	called	Clemenza	as	soon	as	I	got	home.”
																Corleone	turned	to	the	massive	Clemenza.	The	caporegime	nodded.	“I released	them.	Tell	me,	Godfather,	is	it	possible	for	a	Sicilian	to	be	as	dumb	as the	Bocchicchios	pretend	to	be?”
																Don	Corleone	smiled	a	little.	“They	are	clever	enough	to	make	a	good living.	Why	is	it	so	necessary	to	be	more	clever	than	that?	It’s	not	the Bocchicchios	who	cause	the	troubles	of	this	world.	But	it’s	true,	they	haven’t	got the	Sicilian	head.”
																They	were	all	in	a	relaxed	mood,	now	that	the	war	was	over.	Don Corleone	himself	mixed	drinks	and	brought	one	to	each	man.	The	Don	sipped his	carefully	and	lit	up	a	cigar.
																“I	want	nothing	set	forth	to	discover	what	happened	to	Sonny,	that’s done	with	and	to	be	forgotten.	I	want	all	cooperation	with	the	other	Families even	if	they	become	a	little	greedy	and	we	don’t	get	our	proper	share	in	things.	I want	nothing	to	break	this	peace	no	matter	what	the	provocation	until	we’ve found	a	way	to	bring	Michael	home.	And	I	want	that	to	be	first	thing	on	your minds.	Remember	this,	when	he	comes	back	he	must	come	back	in	absolute safety.	I	don’t	mean	from	the	Tattaglias	or	the	Barzinis.	What	I’m	concerned about	are	the	police.	Sure,	we	can	get	rid	of	the	real	evidence	against	him;	that waiter	won’t	testify,	nor	that	spectator	or	gunman	or	whatever	he	was.	The	real evidence	is	the	least	of	our	worries	since	we	know	about	it.	What	we	have	to worry	about	is	the	police	framing	false	evidence	because	their	informers	have assured	them	that	Michael	Corleone	is	the	man	who	killed	their	captain.	Very well.	We	have	to	demand	that	the	Five	Families	do	everything	in	their	power	to correct	this	belief	of	the	police.	All	their	informers	who	work	with	the	police must	come	up	with	new	stories.	I	think	after	my	speech	this	afternoon	they	will understand	it	is	to	their	interest	to	do	so.	But	that’s	not	enough.	We	have	to	come up	with	something	special	so	Michael	won’t	ever	have	to	worry	about	that	again. Otherwise	there’s	no	point	in	him	coming	back	to	this	country.	So	let’s	all	think about	that.	That’s	the	most	important	matter.
																“Now,	any	man	should	be	allowed	one	foolishness	in	his	life.	I	have had	mine.	I	want	all	the	land	around	the	mall	bought,	the	houses	bought.	I	don’t want	any	man	able	to	look	out	his	window	into	my	garden	even	if	it’s	a	mile away.	I	want	a	fence	around	the	mall	and	I	want	the	mall	to	be	on	full	protection all	the	time.	I	want	a	gate	in	that	fence.	In	short,	I	wish	now	to	live	in	a	fortress. Let	me	say	to	you	now	that	I	will	never	go	into	the	city	to	work	again.	I	will	be semiretired.	I	feel	an	urge	to	work	in	the	garden,	to	make	a	little	wine	when	the grapes	are	in	season.	I	want	to	live	in	my	house.	The	only	time	I’ll	leave	is	to	go on	a	little	vacation	or	to	see	someone	on	important	business	and	then	I	want	all precautions	taken.	Now	don’t	take	this	amiss.	I’m	not	preparing	anything.	I’m being	prudent,	I’ve	always	been	a	prudent	man,	there	is	nothing	I	find	so	little	to my	taste	as	carelessness	in	life.	Women	and	children	can	afford	to	be	careless, men	cannot.	Be	leisurely	in	all	these	things,	no	frantic	preparations	to	alarm	our
friends.	It	can	be	done	in	such	a	way	as	to	seem	natural.
																“Now	I’m	going	to	leave	things	more	and	more	up	to	each	of	you three.	I	want	the	Santino	regime	disbanded	and	the	men	placed	in	your	regimes. That	should	reassure	our	friends	and	show	that	I	mean	peace.	Tom,	I	want	you	to put	together	a	group	of	men	who	will	go	to	Las	Vegas	and	give	me	a	full	report on	what	is	going	on	out	there.	Tell	me	about	Fredo,	what	is	really	happening	out there,	I	hear	I	wouldn’t	recognize	my	own	son.	It	seems	he’s	a	cook	now,	that	he amuses	himself	with	young	girls	more	than	a	grown	man	should.	Well,	he	was always	too	serious	when	he	was	young	and	he	was	never	the	man	for	Family business.	But	let’s	find	out	what	really	can	be	done	out	there.”
																Hagen	said	quietly,	“Should	we	send	your	son-in-law?	After	all,	Carlo is	a	native	of	Nevada,	he	knows	his	way	around.”
																Don	Corleone	shook	his	head.	“No,	my	wife	is	lonely	here	without	any of	her	children.	I	want	Constanzia	and	her	husband	moved	into	one	of	the	houses on	the	mall.	I	want	Carlo	given	a	responsible	job,	maybe	I’ve	been	too	harsh	on him,	and”--Don	Corleone	made	a	grimace--”I’m	short	of	sons.	Take	him	out	of the	gambling	and	put	him	in	with	the	unions	where	he	can	do	some	paper	work and	a	lot	of	talking.	He’s	a	good	talker.”	There	was	the	tiniest	note	of	contempt in	the	Don’s	voice.
																Hagen	nodded.	“OK,	Clemenza	and	I	will	go	over	all	the	people	and put	together	a	group	to	do	the	Vegas	job.	Do	you	want	me	to	call	Freddie	home for	a	few	days?”
																The	Don	shook	his	head.	He	said	cruelly,	“What	for?	My	wife	can	still cook	our	meals.	Let	him	stay	out	there.”	The	three	men	shifted	uneasily	in	their seats.	They	had	not	realized	Freddie	was	in	such	severe	disfavor	with	his	father and	they	suspected	it	must	be	because	of	something	they	did	not	know.
																Don	Corleone	sighed.	“I	hope	to	grow	some	good	green	peppers	and tomatoes	in	the	garden	this	year,	more	than	we	can	eat.	I’ll	make	you	presents	of them.	I	want	a	little	peace,	a	little	quiet	and	tranquility	for	my	old	age.	Well, that’s	all.	Have	another	drink	if	you	like.”