		The	car	threaded	through	the	bridge	approaches	and	then	was	on	it, leaving	the	blazing	city	behind.	Michael	kept	his	face	impassive.	Were	they going	to	dump	him	into	the	swamps	or	was	it	just	a	last-minute	change	in meeting	place	by	the	wily	Sollozzo?	But	when	they	were	nearly	all	the	way across,	the	driver	gave	the	wheel	a	violent	twist.	The	heavy	automobile	jumped into	the	air	when	it	hit	the	divider	and	bounced	over	into	the	lanes	going	back	to New	York	City.	Both	McCluskey	and	Sollozzo	were	looking	back	to	see	if anyone	had	tried	doing	the	same	thing.	The	driver	was	really	hitting	it	back	to New	York	and	then	they	were	off	the	bridge	and	going	toward	the	East	Bronx. They	went	through	the	side	streets	with	no	cars	behind	them.	By	this	time	it	was nearly	nine	o’clock.	They	had	made	sure	there	was	no	one	on	their	tail.	Sollozzo lit	up	a	cigarette	after	offering	his	pack	to	McCluskey	and	Michael,	both	of whom	refused.	Sollozzo	said	to	the	driver,	“Nice	work.	I’ll	remember	it.”
																Ten	minutes	later	the	car	pulled	up	in	front	of	a	restaurant	in	a	small Italian	neighborhood.	There	was	no	one	on	the	streets	and	because	of	the lateness	of	the	hour	only	a	few	people	were	still	at	dinner.	Michael	had	been worried	that	the	driver	would	come	in	with	them,	but	he	stayed	outside	with	his car.	The	negotiator	had	not	mentioned	a	driver,	nobody	had.	Technically Sollozzo	had	broken	the	agreement	by	bringing	him	along.	But	Michael	decided not	to	mention	it,	knowing	they	would	think	he	would	be	afraid	to	mention	it, afraid	of	ruining	the	chances	for	the	success	of	the	parley.
																The	three	of	them	sat	at	the	only	round	table,	Sollozzo	refusing	a booth.	There	were	only	two	other	people	in	the	restaurant.	Michael	wondered whether	they	were	Sollozzo	plants.	But	it	didn’t	matter.	Before	they	could interfere	it	would	be	all	over.
																McCluskey	asked	with	real	interest,	“Is	the	Italian	food	good	here?”
																Sollozzo	reassured	him.	“Try	the	veal,	it’s	the	finest	in	New	York.” The	solitary	waiter	had	brought	a	bottle	of	wine	to	the	table	and	uncorked	it.	He poured	three	glasses	full.	Surprisingly	McCluskey	did	not	drink.	“I	must	be	the only	Irishman	who	don’t	take	the	booze,”	he	said.	“I	seen	too	many	good	people get	in	trouble	because	of	the	booze.”
																Sollozzo	said	placatingly	to	the	captain,	“I	am	going	to	talk	Italian	to Mike,	not	because	I	don’t	trust	you	but	because	I	can’t	explain	myself	properly in	English	and	I	want	to	convince	Mike	that	I	mean	well,	that	it’s	to	everybody’s advantage	for	us	to	come	to	an	agreement	tonight.	Don’t	be	insulted	by	this,	it’s not	that	I	don’t	trust	you.”
																Captain	McCluskey	gave	them	both	an	ironic	grin.	“Sure,	you	two	go right	ahead,”	he	said.	“I’ll	concentrate	on	my	veal	and	spaghetti.”
																Sollozzo	began	speaking	to	Michael	in	rapid	Sicilian.	He	said,	“You must	understand	that	what	happened	between	me	and	your	father	was	strictly	a business	matter.	I	have	a	great	respect	for	Don	Corleone	and	would	beg	for	the opportunity	to	enter	his	service.	But	you	must	understand	that	your	father	is	an old-fashioned	man.	He	stands	in	the	way	of	progress.	The	business	I	am	in	is	the coming	thing,	the	wave	of	the	future,	there	are	untold	millions	of	dollars	for everyone	to	make.	But	your	father	stands	in	the	way	because	of	certain unrealistic	scruples.	By	doing	this	he	imposes	his	will	on	men	like	myself.	Yes, yes,	I	know,	he	says	to	me,	‘Go	ahead,	it’s	your	business,’	but	we	both	know	that is	unrealistic.	We	must	tread	on	each	other’s	corns.	What	he	is	really	telling	me is	that	I	cannot	operate	my	business.	I	am	a	man	who	respects	himself	and cannot	let	another	man	impose	his	will	‘on	me	so	what	had	to	happen	did happen.	Let	me	say	that	I	had	the	support,	the	silent	support	of	all	the	New	York Families.	And	the	Tattaglia	Family	became	my	partners.	If	this	quarrel continues,	then	the	Corleone	Family	will	stand	alone	against	everyone.	Perhaps if	your	father	were	well,	it	could	be	done.	But	the	eldest	son	is	not	the	man	the Godfather	is,	no	disrespect	intended.	And	the	Irish	Consigliere,	Hagen,	is	not	the man	Genco	Abbandando	was,	God	rest	his	soul.	So	I	propose	a	peace,	a	truce. Let	us	cease	all	hostilities	until	your	father	is	well	again	and	can	take	part	in these	bargainings.	The	Tattaglia	Family	agrees,	upon	my	persuasions	and	my indemnities,	to	forgo	justice	for	their	son	Bruno.	We	will	have	peace. Meanwhile,	I	have	to	make	a	living	and	will	do	a	little	trading	in	my	business.	I do	not	ask	your	cooperation	but	I	ask	you,	the	Corleone	Family,	not	to	interfere. These	are	my	proposals.	I	assume	you	have	the	authority	to	agree,	to	make	a deal.”
																Michael	said	in	Sicilian,	“Tell	me	more	about	how	you	propose	to	start
your	business,	exactly	what	part	my	Family	has	to	play	in	it	and	what	profit	we can	take	from	this	business.”
																“You	want	the	whole	proposition	in	detail	then?”	Sollozzo	asked.
																Michael	said	gravely,	“Most	important	of	all	I	must	have	sure guarantees	that	no	more	attempts	will	be	made	on	my	father’s	life.”
																Sollozzo	raised	his	hand	expressively.	“What	guarantees	can	I	give you?	I’m	the	hunted	one.	I’ve	missed	my	chance.	You	think	too	highly	of	me, my	friend.	I	am	not	that	clever.”
																Michael	was	sure	now	that	the	conference	was	only	to	gain	a	few days’	time.	That	Sollozzo	would	make	another	attempt	to	kill	the	Don.	What	was beautiful	was	that	the	Turk	was	underrating	him	as	a	punk	kid.	Michael	felt	that strange	delicious	chill	filling	his	body.	He	made	his	face	look	distressed. Sollozzo	asked	sharply,	“What	is	it?”
																Michael	said	with	an	embarrassed	air,	“The	wine	went	right	to	my bladder.	I’ve	been	holding	it	in.	Is	it	all	right	if	I	go	to	the	bathroom?”
																Sollozzo	was	searching	his	face	intently	with	his	dark	eyes.	He reached	over	and	roughly	thrust	his	hand	in	Michael’s	crotch,	under	it	and around,	searching	for	a	weapon.	Michael	looked	offended.	McCluskey	said curtly,	“I	frisked	him.	I’ve	frisked	thousands	of	young	punks.	He’s	clean.”
																Sollozzo	didn’t	like	it.	For	no	reason	at	all	he	didn’t	like	it.	He	glanced at	the	man	sitting	at	a	table	opposite	them	and	raised	his	eyebrows	toward	the door	of	the	bathroom.	The	man	gave	a	slight	nod	that	he	had	checked	it,	that there	was	nobody	inside.	Sollozzo	said	reluctantly,	“Don’t	take	too	long.”	He had	marvelous	antenna,	he	was	nervous.
																Michael	got	up	and	went	into	the	bathroom.	The	urinal	had	a	pink	bar of	soap	in	it	secured	by	a	wire	net.	He	went	into	the	booth.	He	really	had	to	go, his	bowels	were	loose.	He	did	it	very	quickly,	then	reached	behind	the	enamel water	cabinet	until	his	hand	touched	the	small,	blunt-nosed	gun	fastened	with
tape.	He	ripped	the	gun	loose,	remembering	that	Clemenza	had	said	not	to	worry about	leaving	prints	on	the	tape.	He	shoved	the	gun	into	his	waistband	and buttoned	his	jacket	over	it.	He	washed	his	hands	and	wet	his	hair.	He	wiped	his prints	off	the	faucet	with	his	handkerchief.	Then	he	left	the	toilet.
																Sollozzo	was	sitting	directly	facing	the	door	of	the	toilet,	his	dark	eyes blazing	with	alertness.	Michael	gave	a	smile.	“Now	I	can	talk,”	he	said	with	a sigh	of	relief.
																Captain	McCluskey	was	eating	the	plate	of	veal	and	spaghetti	that	had arrived.	The	man	on	the	far	wall	had	been	stiff	with	attention,	now	he	too relaxed	visibly.
																Michael	sat	down	again.	He	remembered	Clemenza	had	told	him	not to	do	this,	to	come	out	of	the	toilet	and	blaze	away.	But	either	out	of	some warning	instinct	or	sheer	funk	he	had	not	done	so.	He	had	felt	that	if	he	had made	one	swift	move	he	would	have	been	cut	down.	Now	he	felt	safe	and	he must	have	been	scared	because	he	was	glad	he	was	no	longer	standing	on	his legs.	They	had	gone	weak	with	trembling.
																Sollozzo	was	leaning	toward	him.	Michael,	his	belly	covered	by	the table,	unbuttoned	his	jacket	and	listened	intently.	He	could	not	understand	a word	the	man	was	saying.	It	was	literally	gibberish	to	him.	His	mind	was	so filled	with	pounding	blood	that	no	word	registered.	Underneath	the	table	his right	hand	moved	to	the	gun	tucked	into	his	waistband	and	he	drew	it	free.	At that	moment	the	waiter	came	to	take	their	order	and	Sollozzo	turned	his	head	to speak	to	the	waiter.	Michael	thrust	the	table	away	from	him	with	his	left	hand and	his	right	hand	‘shoved	the	gun	almost	against	Sollozzo’s	head.	The	man’s coordination	was	so	acute	that	he	had	already	begun	to	fling	himself	away	at Michael’s	motion.	But	Michael,	younger,	his	reflexes	sharper,	pulled	the	trigger. The	bullet	caught	Sollozzo	squarely	between	his	eye	and	his	ear	and	when	it exited	on	the	other	side	blasted	out	a	huge	gout	of	blood	and	skull	fragments onto	the	petrified	waiter’s	jacket.	Instinctively	Michael	knew	that	one	bullet	was enough.	Sollozzo	had	turned	his	head	in	that	last	moment	and	he	had	seen	the light	of	life	die	in	the	man’s	eyes	as	clearly	as	a	candle	goes	out.
																Only	one	second	had	gone	by	as	Michael	pivoted	to	bring	the	gun	to bear	on	McCluskey.	The	police	captain	was	staring	at	Sollozzo	with	phlegmatic surprise,	as	if	this	had	nothing	to	do	with	him.	He	did	not	seem	to	be	aware	of his	own	danger.	His	veal-covered	fork	was	suspended	in	his	hand	and	his	eyes were	just	turning	on	Michael.	And	the	expression	on	his	face,	in	his	eyes,	held such	confident	outrage,	as	if	now	he	expected	Michael	to	surrender	or	to	run away,	that	Michael	smiled	at	him	as	he	pulled	the	trigger.	This	shot	was	bad,	not mortal.	It	caught	McCluskey	in	his	thick	bull-like	throat	and	he	started	to	choke loudly	as	if	he	had	swallowed	too	large	a	bite	of	the	veal.	Then	the	air	seemed	to fill	with	a	fine	mist	of	sprayed	blood	as	he	coughed	it	out	of	his	shattered	lungs. Very	coolly,	very	deliberately,	Michael	fired	the	next	shot	through	the	top	of	his white-haired	skull.
																The	air	seemed	to	be	full	of	pink	mist.	Michael	swung	toward	the	man sitting	against	the	wall.	This	man	had	not	made	a	move:	He	seemed	paralyzed. Now	he	carefully	showed	his	hands	on	top	of	the	table	and	looked	away.	The waiter	was	staggering	back	toward	the	kitchen,	an	expression	of	horror	on	his face,	staring	at	Michael	in	disbelief.	Sollozzo	was	still	in	his	chair,	the	side	of	his body	propped	up	by	the	table.	McCluskey,	his	heavy	body	pulling	downward, had	fallen	off	his	chair	onto	the	floor.	Michael	let	the	gun	slip	out	of	his	hand	so that	it	bounced	off	his	body	and	made	no	noise.	He	saw	that	neither	the	man against	the	wall	nor	the	waiter	had	noticed	him	dropping	the	gun.	He	strode	the few	steps	toward	the	door	and	opened	it.	Sollozzo’s	car	was	parked	at	the	curb still,	but	there	was	no	sign	of	the	driver.	Michael	turned	left	and	around	the corner.	Headlights	flashed	on	and	a	battered	sedan	pulled	up	to	him,	the	door swinging	open.	He	jumped	in	and	the	car	roared	away.	He	saw	that	it	was	Tessio at	the	wheel,	his	trim	features	hard	as	marble.
																“Did	you	do	the	job	on	Sollozzo?”	Tessio	asked.
																For	that	moment	Michael	was	struck	by	the	idiom	Tessio	had	used.	It was	always	used	in	a	sexual	sense,	to	do	the	job	on	a	woman	meant	seducing her.	It	was	curious	that	Tessio	used	it	now.	“Both	of	them,”	Michael	said.
																“Sure?”	Tessio	asked.
																“I	saw	their	brains,”	Michael	said.
																There	was	a	change	of	clothes	for	Michael	in	the	car.	Twenty	minutes later	he	was	on	an	Italian	freighter	slated	for	Sicily.	Two	hours	later	the	freighter put	out	to	sea	and	from	his	cabin	Michael	could	see	the	lights	of	New	York	City bumming	like	the	fires	of	hell.	He	felt	an	enormous	sense	of	relief.	He	was	out	of it	now.	The	feeling	was	familiar	and	he	remembered	being	taken	off	the	beach	of an	island	his	Marine	division	had	invaded.	The	battle	had	been	still	going	on	but he	had	received	a	slight	wound	and	was	being	ferried	back	to	a	hospital	ship.	He had	felt	the	same	overpowering	relief	then	that	he	felt	now.	All	hell	would	break loose	but	he	wouldn’t	be	there.
	
																On	the	day	after	the	murder	of	Sollozzo	and	Captain	McCluskey,	the police	captains	and	lieutenants	in	every	station	house	in	New	York	City	sent	out the	word:	there	would	be	no	more	gambling,	no	more	prostitution,	no	more	deals of	any	kind	until	the	murderer	of	Captain	McCluskey	was	caught.	Massive	raids began	all	over	the	city.	All	unlawful	business	activities	came	to	a	standstill.
																Later	that	day	an	emissary	from	the	Families	asked	the	Corleone Family	if	they	were	prepared	to	give	up	the	murderer.	They	were	told	that	the affair	did	not	concern	them.	That	night	a	bomb	exploded	in	the	Corleone	Family mall	in	Long	Beach,	thrown	from	a	car	that	pulled	up	to	the	chain,	then	roared away.	That	night	also	two	button	men	of	the	Corleone	Family	were	killed	as	they peaceably	ate	their	dinner	in	a	small	Italian	restaurant	in	Greenwich	Village.	The Five	Families	War	of	1946	had	begun.
															
Book	II
															
															
Chapter	12
	
																Johnny	Fontane	waved	a	casual	dismissal	to	the	manservant	and	said, “See	you	in	the	morning,	Billy.”	The	colored	butler	bowed	his	way	out	of	the huge	dining	room-living	room	with	its	view	of	the	Pacific	Ocean.	It	was	a friendly-goodbye	sort	of	bow,	not	a	servant’s	bow,	and	given	only	because Johnny	Fontane	had	company	for	dinner.
																Johnny’s	company	was	a	girl	named	Sharon	Moore,	a	New	York	City Greenwich	Village	girl	in	Hollywood	to	try	for	a	small	part	in	a	movie	being produced	by	an	old	flame	who	had	made	the	big	time.	She	had	visited	the	set while	Johnny	was	acting	in	the	Woltz	movie.	Johnny	had	found	her	young	and fresh	and	charming	and	witty,	and	had	asked	her	to	come	to	his	place	for	dinner that	evening.	His	invitations	to	dinner	were	always	famous	and	had	the	force	of royalty	and	of	course	she	said	yes.
																Sharon	Moore	obviously	expected	him	to	come	on	very	strong	because of	his	reputation,	but	Johnny	hated	the	Hollywood	“piece	of	meat”	approach.	He never	slept	with	any	girl	unless	there	was	something	about	her	he	really	liked. Except,	of	course,	sometimes	when	he	was	very	drunk	and	found	himself	in	bed with	a	girl	he	didn’t	even	remember	meeting	or	seeing	before.	And	now	that	he was	thirty-five	years	old,	divorced	once,	estranged	from	his	second	wife,	with maybe	a	thousand	pubic	scalps	dangling	from	his	belt,	he	simply	wasn’t	that eager.	But	there	was	something	about	Sharon	Moore	that	aroused	affection	in him	and	so	he	had	invited	her	to	dinner.
																He	never	ate	much	but	he	knew	young	pretty	girls	ambitiously	starved themselves	for	pretty	clothes	and	were	usually	big	eaters	on	a	date	so	there	was plenty	of	food	on	the	table.	There	was	also	plenty	of	liquor;	champagne	in	a bucket,	scotch,	rye,	brandy	and	liqueurs	on	the	sideboard.	Johnny	served	the drinks	and	the	plates	of	food	already	prepared.	When	they	had	finished	eating	he led	her	into	the	huge	living	room	with	its	glass	wall	that	looked	out	onto	the Pacific.	He	put	a	stack	of	Ella	Fitzgerald	records	on	the	hifi	and	settled	on	the
couch	with	Sharon.	He	made	a	little	small	talk	with	her,	found	out	about	what she	had	been	like	as	a	kid,	whether	she	had	been	a	tomboy	or	boy	crazy,	whether she	had	been	homely	or	pretty,	lonely	or	gay.	He	always	found	these	details touching,	it	always	evoked	the	tenderness	he	needed	to	make	love.
																They	nestled	together	on	the	sofa,	very	friendly,	very	comfortable.	He kissed	her	on	the	lips,	a	cool	friendly	kiss,	and	when	she	kept	it	that	way	he	left it	that	way.	Outside	the	huge	picture	window	he	could	see	the	dark	blue	sheet	of the	Pacific	lying	flat	beneath	the	moonlight.
																“How	come	you’re	not	playing	any	of	your	records?”	Sharon	asked him.	Her	voice	was	teasing.	Johnny	smiled	at	her.	He	was	amused	by	her	teasing him.	“I’m	not	that	Hollywood,”	he	said.
																“Play	some	for	me,”	she	said.	“Or	sing	for	me.	You	know,	like	the movies.	I’ll	bubble	up	and	melt	all	over	you	just	like	those	girls	do	on	the screen.”
																Johnny	laughed	outright.	When	he	had	been	younger,	he	had	done	just such	things	and	the	result	had	always	been	stagy,	the	girls	trying	to	look	sexy and	melting,	making	their	eyes	swim	with	desire	for	an	imagined	fantasy camera.	He	would	never	dream	of	singing	to	a	girl	now;	for	one	thing,	he	hadn’t sung	for	months,	he	didn’t	trust	his	voice.	For	another	thing,	amateurs	didn’t realize	how	much	professionals	depended	on	technical	help	to	sound	as	good	as they	did.	He	could	have	played	his	records	but	he	felt	the	same	shyness	about hearing	his	youthful	passionate	voice	as	an	aging,	balding	man	running	to	fat feels	about	showing	pictures	of	himself	as	a	youth	in	the	full	bloom	of	manhood.
																“My	voice	is	out	of	shape,”	he	said.”	And	honestly,	I’m	sick	of	hearing myself	sing.”
																They	both	sipped	their	drinks.	“I	hear	you’re	great	in	this	picture,”	she said.	“Is	it	true	you	did	it	for	nothing?”
																“Just	a	token	payment,”	Johnny	said.
																He	got	up	to	give	her	a	refill	on	her	brandy	glass,	gave	her	a	goldmonogrammed	cigarette	and	flashed	his	lighter	out	to	hold	the	light	for	her.	She puffed	on	the	cigarette	and	sipped	her	drink	and	he	sat	down	beside	her	again. His	glass	had	considerably	more	brandy	in	it	than	hers,	he	needed	it	to	warm himself,	to	cheer	himself,	to	charge	himself	up.	His	situation	was	the	reverse	of the	lover’s	usual	one.	He	had	to	get	himself	drunk	instead	of	the	girl.	The	girl was	usually	too	willing	where	he	was	not.	The	last	two	years	had	been	hell	on his	ego,	and	he	used	this	simple	way	to	restore	it,	sleeping	with	a	young	fresh girl	for	one	night,	taking	her	to	dinner	a	few	times,	giving	her	an	expensive present	and	then	brushing	her	off	in	the	nicest	way	possible	so	that	her	feelings wouldn’t	be	hurt.	And	then	they	could	always	say	they	had	had	a	thing	with	the great	Johnny	Fontane.	It	wasn’t	true	love,	but	you	couldn’t	knock	it	if	the	girl was	beautiful	and	genuinely	nice.	He	hated	the	hard,	bitchy	ones,	the	ones	who screwed	for	him	and	then	rushed	off	to	tell	their	friends	that	they’d	screwed	the great	Johnny	Fontane,	always	adding	that	they’d	had	better.	What	amazed	him more	than	anything	else	in	his	career	were	the	complaisant	husbands	who	almost told	him	to	his	face	that	they	forgave	their	wives	since	it	was	allowed	for	even the	most	virtuous	matron	to	be	unfaithful	with	a	great	singing	and	movie	star	like Johnny	Fontane.	That	really	floored	him.
																He	loved	Ella	Fitzgerald	on	records.	He	loved	that	kind	of	clean singing,	that	kind	of	clean	phrasing.	It	was	the	only	thing	in	life	he	really understood	and	he	knew	he	understood	it	better	than	anyone	else	on	earth.	Now lying	back	on	the	couch,	the	brandy	warming	his	throat,	he	felt	a	desire	to	sing, not	music,	but	to	phrase	with	the	records,	yet	it	was	something	impossible	to	do in	front	of	a	stranger.	He	put	his	free	hand	in	Sharon’s	lap,	sipping	his	drink from	his	other	hand.	Without	any	slyness	but	with	the	sensualness	of	a	child seeking	warmth,	his	hand	in	her	lap	pulled	up	the	silk	of	her	dress	to	show	milky white	thigh	above	the	sheer	netted	gold	of	her	stockings	and	as	always,	despite all	the	women,	all	the	years,	all	the	familiarity,	Johnny	felt	the	fluid	sticky warmness	flooding	through	his	body	at	that	sight.	The	miracle	still	happened, and	what	would	he	do	when	that	failed	him	as	his	voice	had?
																He	was	ready	now.	He	put	his	drink	down	on	the	long	inlaid	cocktail table	and	turned	his	body	toward	her.	He	was	very	sure,	very	deliberate,	and	yet tender.	There	was	nothing	sly	or	lecherously	lascivious	in	his	caresses.	He	kissed her	on	the	lips	while	his	hands	rose	to	her	breasts.	His	hand	fell	to	her	warm
thighs,	the	skin	so	silky	to	his	touch.	Her	returning	kiss	was	warm	but	not passionate	and	he	preferred	it	that	way	right	now.	He	hated	girls	who	turned	on all	of	a	sudden	as	if	their	bodies	were	motors	galvanized	into	erotic	pumpings	by the	touching	of	a	hairy	switch.
																Then	he	did	something	he	always	did,	something	that	had	never	yet failed	to	arouse	him.	Delicately	and	as	lightly	as	it	was	possible	to	do	so	and	still feel	something,	he	brushed	the	tip	of	his	middle	finger	deep	down	between	her thighs.	Some	girls	never	even	felt	that	initial	move	toward	lovemaking.	Some were	distracted	by	it,	not	sure	it	was	a	physical	touch	because	at	the	same	time he	always	kissed	them	deeply	on	the	mouth.	Still	others	seemed	to	suck	in	his finger	or	gobble	it	up	with	a	pelvic	thrust.	And	of	course	before	he	became famous,	some	girls	had	slapped	his	face.	It	was	his	whole	technique	and	usually it	served	him	well	enough.
																Sharon’s	reaction	was	unusual.	She	accepted	it	all,	the	touch,	the	kiss, then	shifted	her	mouth	off	his,	shifted	her	body	ever	so	slightly	back	along	the couch	and	picked	up	her	drink.	It	was	a	cool	but	definite	refusal.	It	happened sometimes.	Rarely;	but	it	happened.	Johnny	picked	up	his	drink	and	lit	a cigarette.
																She	was	saying	something	very	sweetly,	very	lightly.	“It’s	not	that	I don’t	like	you,	Johnny,	you’re	much	nicer	than	I	thought	you’d	be.	And	it’s	not because	I’m	not	that	kind	of	a	girl.	It’s	just	that	I	have	to	be	turned	on	to	do	it with	a	guy,	you	know	what	I	mean?”
																Johnny	Fontane	smiled	at	her.	He	still	liked	her.”	And	I	don’t	turn	you on?”
																She	was	a	little	embarrassed.	“Well,	you	know,	when	you	were	so great	singing	and	all,	I	was	still	a	little	kid.	I	sort	of	just	missed	you,	I	was	the next	generation.	Honest,	it’s	not	that	I’m	goody-goody.	If	you	were	a	movie	star I	grew	up	on,	I’d	have	my	panties	off	in	a	second.”
																He	didn’t	like	her	quite	so	much	now.	She	was	sweet,	she	was	witty, she	was	intelligent.	She	hadn’t	fallen	all	over	herself	to	screw	for	him	or	try	to