said,	“The	fucking	sonofabitch,	the	fucking	sonofabitch.”	He	ran	out	of	the house.
																Hagen	knew	the	look	on	Sonny’s	face,	all	reasoning	power	had	left him.	At	this	moment	Sonny	was	capable	of	anything.	Hagen	also	knew	that	the ride	into	the	city	would	cool	Sonny	off,	make	him	more	rational.	But	that rationality	might	make	him	even	more	dangerous,	though	the	rationality	would enable	him	to	protect	himself	against	the	consequences	of	his	rage.	Hagen	heard the	car	motor	roaring	into	life	and	he	said	to	the	two	bodyguards,	“Go	after him.”
																Then	he	went	to	the	phone	and	made	some	calls.	He	arranged	for	some men	of	Sonny’s	regime	living	in	the	city	to	go	up	to	Carlo	Rizzi’s	apartment	and get	Carlo	out	of	there.	Other	men	would	stay	with	Connie	until	Sonny	arrived. He	was	taking	a	chance,	thwarting	Sonny,	but	he	knew	the	Don	would	back	him up.	He	was	afraid	that	Sonny	might	kill	Carlo	in	front	of	witnesses.	He	did	not expect	trouble	from	the	enemy.	The	Five	Families	had	been	quiet	too	long	and obviously	were	looking	for	peace	of	some	kind.
																By	the	time	Sonny	roared	out	of	the	mall	in	his	Buick,	he	had	already regained,	partly,	his	senses.	He	noted	the	two	bodyguards	getting	into	a	car	to follow	him	and	approved.	He	expected	no	danger,	the	Five	Families	had	quit counterattacking,	were	not	really	fighting	anymore.	He	had	grabbed	his	jacket	in the	foyer	and	there	was	a	gun	in	a	secret	dashboard	compartment	of	the	car,	the car	registered	in	the	name	of	a	member	of	his	regime,	so	that	he	personally	could not	get	into	any	legal	trouble.	But	he	did	not	anticipate	needing	any	weapon.	He did	not	even	know	what	he	was	going	to	do	with	Carlo	Rizzi.
																Now	that	he	had	a	chance	to	think,	Sonny	knew	he	could	not	kill	the father	of	an	unborn	child,	and	that	father	his	sister’s	husband.	Not	over	a domestic	spat.	Except	that	it	was	not	just	a	domestic	spat.	Carlo	was	a	bad	guy and	Sonny	felt	responsible	that	his	sister	had	met	the	bastard	through	him.
																The	paradox	in	Sonny’s	violent	nature	was	that	he	could	not	hit	a woman	and	had	never	done	so.	That	he	could	not	harm	a	child	or	anything helpless.	When	Carlo	had	refused	to	fight	back	against	him	that	day,	it	had	kept
Sonny	from	killing	him;	complete	submission	disarmed	his	violence.	As	a	boy, he	had	been	truly	tenderhearted.	That	he	had	become	a	murderer	as	a	man	was simply	his	destiny.
																But	he	would	settle	this	thing	once	and	for	all,	Sonny	thought,	as	he headed	the	Buick	toward	the	causeway	that	would	take	him	over	the	water	from Long	Beach	to	the	parkways	on	the	other	side	of	Jones	Beach.	He	always	used this	route	when	he	went	to	New	York.	There	was	less	traffic.
																He	decided	he	would	send	Connie	home	with	the	bodyguards	and	then he	would	have	a	session	with	his	brother-in-law.	What	would	happen	after	that he	didn’t	know.	If	the	bastard	had	really	hurt	Connie,	he’d	make	a	cripple	out	of the	bastard.	But	the	wind	coming	over	the	causeway,	the	salty	freshness	of	the air,	cooled	his	anger.	He	put	the	window	down	all	the	way.
																He	had	taken	the	Jones	Beach	Causeway,	as	always,	because	it	was usually	deserted	this	time	of	night,	at	this	time	of	year,	and	he	could	speed recklessly	until	he	hit	the	parkways	on	the	other	side.	And	even	there	traffic would	be	light.	The	release	of	driving	very	fast	would	help	dissipate	what	he knew	was	a	dangerous	tension.	He	had	already	left	his	bodyguards’	car	far behind.
																The	causeway	was	badly	lit,	there	was	not	a	single	car.	Far	ahead	he saw	the	white	cone	of	the	manned	tollbooth.
																There	were	other	tollbooths	beside	it	but	they	were	staffed	only	during the	day,	for	heavier	traffic.	Sonny	started	braking	the	Buick	and	at	the	same	time searched	his	pockets	for	change.	He	had	none.	He	reached	for	his	wallet,	flipped it	open	with	one	hand	and	fingered	out	a	bill.	He	came	within	the	arcade	of	light and	he	saw	to	his	mild	surprise	a	car	in	the	tollbooth	slot	blocking	it,	the	driver obviously	asking	some	sort	of	directions	from	the	toll	taker.	Sonny	honked	his horn	and	the	other	car	obediently	rolled	through	to	let	his	car	slide	into	the	slot.
																Sonny	handed	the	toll	taker	the	dollar	bill	and	waited	for	his	change. He	was	in	a	hurry	now	to	close	the	window.	The	Atlantic	Ocean	air	had	chilled the	whole	car.	But	the	toll	taker	was	fumbling	with	his	change;	the	dumb	son	of
a	bitch	actually	dropped	it.	Head	and	body	disappeared	as	the	toll	man	stooped down	in	his	booth	to	pick	up	the	money.
																At	that	moment	Sonny	noticed	that	the	other	car	had	not	kept	going but	had	parked	a	few	feet	ahead,	still	blocking	his	way.	At	that	same	moment	his lateral	vision	caught	sight	of	another	man	in	the	darkened	tollbooth	to	his	right. But	he	did	not	have	time	to	think	about	that	because	two	men	came	out	of	the	car parked	in	front	and	walked	toward	him.	The	toll	collector	still	had	not	appeared. And	then	in	the	fraction	of	a	second	before	anything	actually	happened,	Santino Corleone	knew	he	was	a	dead	man.	And	in	that	moment	his	mind	was	lucid, drained	of	all	violence,	as	if	the	hidden	fear	finally	real	and	present	had	purified him.
																Even	so,	his	huge	body	in	a	reflex	for	life	crashed	against	the	Buick door,	bursting	its	lock.	The	man	in	the	darkened	tollbooth	opened	fire	and	the shots	caught	Sonny	Corleone	in	the	head	and	neck	as	his	massive	frame	spilled out	of	the	car.	The	two	men	in	front	held	up	their	guns	now,	the	man	in	the darkened	tollbooth	cut	his	fire,	and	Sonny’s	body	sprawled	on	the	asphalt	with the	legs	still	partly	inside.	The	two	men	each	fired	shots	into	Sonny’s	body,	then kicked	him	in	the	face	to	disfigure	his	features	even	more,	to	show	a	mark	made by	a	more	personal	human	power.
																Seconds	afterward,	all	four	men,	the	three	actual	assassins	and	the bogus	toll	collector,	were	in	their	car	and	speeding	toward	the	Meadowbrook Parkway	on	the	other	side	of	Jones	Beach.	Their	pursuit	was	blocked	by	Sonny’s car	and	body	in	the	tollgate	slot	but	when	Sonny’s	bodyguards	pulled	up	a	few minutes	later	and	saw	his	body	lying	there,	they	had	no	intention	to	pursue.	They swung	their	car	around	in	a	huge	arc	and	returned	to	Long	Beach.	At	the	first public	phone	off	the	causeway	one	of	them	hopped	out	and	called	Tom	Hagen. He	was	very	curt	and	very	brisk.	“Sonny’s	dead,	they	got	him	at	the	Jones	Beach toll.”
																Hagen’s	voice	was	perfectly	calm.	“OK,”	he	said.	“Go	to	Clemenza’s house	and	tell	him	to	come	here	right	away.	He’ll	tell	you	what	to	do.”
																Hagen	had	taken	the	call	in	the	kitchen,	with	Mama	Corleone	bustling
around	preparing	a	snack	for	the	arrival	of	her	daughter.	He	had	kept	his composure	and	the	old	woman	had	not	noticed	anything	amiss.	Not	that	she could	not	have,	if	she	wanted	to,	but	in	her	life	with	the	Don	she	had	learned	it was	far	wiser	not	to	perceive.	That	if	it	was	necessary	to	know	something painful,	it	would	be	told	to	her	soon	enough.	And	if	it	was	a	pain	that	could	be spared	her,	she	could	do	without.	She	was	quite	content	not	to	share	the	pain	of her	men,	after	all	did	they	share	the	pain	of	women?	Impassively	she	boiled	her coffee	and	set	the	table	with	food.	In	her	experience	pain	and	fear	did	not	dull physical	hunger;	in	her	experience	the	taking	of	food	dulled	pain.	She	would have	been	outraged	if	a	doctor	had	tried	to	sedate	her	with	a	drug,	but	coffee	and a	crust	of	bread	were	another	matter;	she	came,	of	course,	from	a	more	primitive culture.
																And	so	she	let	Tom	Hagen	escape	to	his	corner	conference	room	and once	in	that	room,	Hagen	began	to	tremble	so	violently	he	had	to	sit	down	with his	legs	squeezed	together,	his	head	hunched	into	his	contracted	shoulders,	hands clasped	together	between	his	knees	as	if	he	were	praying	to	the	devil.
																He	was,	he	knew	now,	no	fit	Consigliere	for	a	Family	at	war.	He	had been	fooled,	faked	out,	by	the	Five	Families	and	their	seeming	timidity.	They had	remained	quiet,	laying	their	terrible	ambush.	They	had	planned	and	waited, holding	their	bloody	hands	no	matter	what	provocation	they	had	been	given. They	had	waited	to	land	one	terrible	blow.	And	they	had.	Old	Genco Abbandando	would	never	have	fallen	for	it,	he	would	have	smelled	a	rat,	he would	have	smoked	them	out,	tripled	his	precautions.	And	through	all	this Hagen	felt	his	grief.	Sonny	had	been	his	true	brother,	his	savior;	his	hero	when they	had	been	boys	together.	Sonny	had	never	been	mean	or	bullying	with	him, had	always	treated	him	with	affection,	had	taken	him	in	his	arms	when	Sollozzo had	turned	him	loose.	Sonny’s	joy	at	that	reunion	had	been	real.	That	he	had grown	up	to	be	a	cruel	and	violent	and	bloody	man	was,	for	Hagen,	not	relevant.
																He	had	walked	out	of	the	kitchen	because	he	knew	he	could	never	tell Mama	Corleone	about	her	son’s	death.	He	had	never	thought	of	her	as	his mother	as	he	thought	of	the	Don	as	his	father	and	Sonny	as	his	brother.	His affection	for	her	was	like	his	affection	for	Freddie	and	Michael	and	Connie.	The affection	for	someone	who	has	been	kind	but	not	loving.	But	he	could	not	tell
her.	In	a	few	short	months	she	had	lost	all	her	sons;	Freddie	exiled	to	Nevada, Michael	hiding	for	his	life	in	Sicily,	and	now	Santino	dead.	Which	of	the	three had	she	loved	most	of	all?	She	had	never	shown.
																It	was	no	more	than	a	few	minutes.	Hagen	got	control	of	himself	again and	picked	up	the	phone.	He	called	Connie’s	number.	It	rang	for	a	long	time before	Connie	answered	in	a	whisper.
																Hagen	spoke	to	her	gently.	“Connie,	this	is	Tom.	Wake	your	husband up,	I	have	to	talk	to	him.”
																Connie	said	in	a	low	frightened	voice,	“Tom,	is	Sonny	coming	here?”
																“No,”	Hagen	said.	“Sonny’s	not	coming	there.	Don’t	worry	about	that. Just	wake	Carlo	up	and	tell	him	it’s	very	important	I	speak	to	him.”
																Connie’s	voice	was	weepy.	“Tom,	he	beat	me	up,	I’m	afraid	he’ll	hurt me	again	if	he	knows	I	called	home.”
																Hagen	said	gently,	“He	won’t.	He’ll	talk	to	me	and	I’ll	straighten	him out.	Everything	will	be	OK.	Tell	him	it’s	very	important,	very,	very	important	he come	to	the	phone.	OK?”
																It	was	almost	five	minutes	before	Carlo’s	voice	came	over	the	phone,	a voice	half	slurred	by	whiskey	and	sleep.	Hagen	spoke	sharply	to	make	him	alert.
																“Listen,	Carlo,”	he	said,	“I’m	going	to	tell	you	something	very shocking.	Now	prepare	yourself	because	when	I	tell	it	to	you	I	want	you	to answer	me	very	casually	as	if	it’s	less	than	it	is.	I	told	Connie	it	was	important	so you	have	to	give	her	a	story.	Tell	her	the	Family	has	decided	to	move	you	both to	one	of	the	houses	in	the	mall	and	to	give	you	a	big	job.	That	the	Don	has finally	decided	to	give	you	a	chance	in	the	hope	of	making	your	home	life	better. You	got	that?”
																There	was	a	hopeful	note	in	Carlo’s	voice	as	he	answered,	“Yeah,
OK.”
																Hagen	went	on,	“In	a	few	minutes	a	couple	of	my	men	are	going	to knock	on	your	door	to	take	you	away	with	them.	Tell	them	I	want	them	to	call me	first.	Just	tell	them	that.	Don’t	say	anything	else.	I’ll	instruct	them	to	leave you	there	with	Connie.	OK?”
																“Yeah,	yeah,	I	got	it,”	Carlo	said.	His	voice	was	excited.	The	tension in	Hagen’s	voice	seemed	to	have	finally	alerted	him	that	the	news	coming	up was	going	to	be	really	important.
																Hagen	gave	it	to	him	straight.	“They	killed	Sonny	tonight.	Don’t	say anything.	Connie	called	him	while	you	were	asleep	and	he	was	on	his	way	over there,	but	I	don’t	want	her	to	know	that,	even	if	she	guesses	it,	I	don’t	want	her to	know	it	for	sure.	She’ll	start	thinking	it’s	all	her	fault.	Now	I	want	you	to	stay with	her	tonight	and	not	tell	her	anything.	I	want	you	to	make	up	with	her.	I	want you	to	be	the	perfect	loving	husband.	And	I	want	you	to	stay	that	way	until	she has	her	baby	at	least.	Tomorrow	morning	somebody,	maybe	you,	maybe	the Don,	maybe	her	mother,	will	tell	Connie	that	her	brother	got	killed.	And	I	want you	by	her	side.	Do	me	this	favor	and	I’ll	take	care	of	you	in	the	times	to	come. You	got	that?”
																Carlo’s	voice	was	a	little	shaky.	“Sure,	Tom,	sure.	Listen,	me	and	you always	got	along.	I’m	grateful.	Understand?”
																“Yeah,”	Hagen	said.	“Nobody	will	blame	your	fight	with	Connie	for causing	this,	don’t	worry	about	that.	I’ll	take	care	of	that.”	He	paused	and	softly, encouragingly,	“Go	ahead	now,	take	care	of	Connie.”	He	broke	the	connection.
																He	had	learned	never	to	make	a	threat,	the	Don	had	taught	him	that, but	Carlo	had	gotten	the	message	all	right:	he	was	a	hair	away	from	death.
																Hagen	made	another	call	to	Tessio,	telling	him	to	come	to	the	mall	in Long	Beach	immediately.	He	didn’t	say	why	and	Tessio	did	not	ask.	Hagen sighed.	Now	would	come	the	part	he	dreaded.
																He	would	have	to	waken	the	Don	from	his	drugged	slumber.	He	would have	to	tell	the	man	he	most	loved	in	the	world	that	he	had	failed	him,	that	he had	failed	to	guard	his	domain	and	the	life	of	his	eldest	son.	He	would	have	to tell	the	Don	everything	was	lost	unless	the	sick	man	himself	could	enter	the battle.	For	taken	did	not	delude	himself.	Only	the	great	Don	himself	could	snatch even	a	stalemate	from	this	terrible	defeat.	Hagen	didn’t	even	bother	checking with	Don	Corleone’s	doctors,	it	would	be	to	no	purpose.	No	matter	what	the doctors	ordered,	even	if	they	told	him	that	the	Don	could	not	rise	from	his sickbed	on	pain	of	death,	he	must	tell	his	adoptive	father	and	then	follow	him. And	of	course	there	was	no	question	about	what	the	Don	would	do.	The	opinions of	medical	men	were	irrelevant	now,	everything	was	irrelevant	now.	The	Don must	be	told	and	he	must	either	take	command	or	order	Hagen	to	surrender	the Corleone	power	to	the	Five	Families.
																And	yet	with	all	his	heart,	Hagen	Dreaded	the	next	hour.	He	tried	to prepare	his	own	manner.	He	would	have	to	be	in	all	ways	strict	with	his	own guilt.	To	reproach	himself	would	only	add	to	the	Don’s	burden.	To	show	his	own grief	would	only	sharpen	the	grief	of	the	Don.	To	point	out	his	own shortcomings	as	a	wartime	Consigliere,	would	only	make	the	Don	reproach himself	for	his	own	bad	judgment	for	picking	such	a	man	for	such	an	important post.
																He	must,	Hagen	knew,	tell	the	news,	present	his	analysis	of	what	must be	done	to	rectify	the	situation	and	then	keep	silent.	His	reactions	thereafter	must be	the	reactions	invited	by	his	Don.	If	the	Don	wanted	him	to	show	guilt,	he would	show	guilt;	if	the	Don	invited	grief,	he	would	lay	bare	his	genuine	sorrow.
																Hagen	lifted	his	head	at	the	sound	of	motors,	cars	rolling	up	onto	the mall.	The	caporegimes	were	arriving.	He	would	brief	them	first	and	then	he would	go	up	and	wake	Don	Corleone.	He	got	up	and	went	to	the	liquor	cabinet by	the	desk	and	took	out	a	glass	and	bottle.	He	stood	there	for	a	moment	so unnerved	he	could	not	pour	the	liquid	from	bottle	to	glass.	Behind	him,	he	heard the	door	to	the	room	close	softly	and,	turning,	he	saw,	fully	dressed	for	the	first time	since	he	had	been	shot,	Don	Corleone.
																The	Don	walked	across	the	room	to	his	huge	leather	armchair	and	sat
down.	He	walked	a	little	stiffly,	his	clothes	hung	a	little	loosely	on	his	frame	but to	Hagen’s	eyes	he	looked	the	same	as	always.	It	was	almost	as	if	by	his	will alone	the	Don	had	discarded	all	external	evidence	of	his	still	weakened	frame. His	face	was	sternly	set	with	all	its	old	force	and	strength.	He	sat	straight	in	the armchair	and	he	said	to	Hagen,	“Give	me	a	drop	of	anisette.”
																Hagen	switched	bottles	and	poured	them	both	a	portion	of	the	fiery, licorice-tasting	alcohol.	It	was	peasant,	homemade	stuff,	much	stronger	than	that sold	in	stores,	the	gift	of	an	old	friend	who	every	year	presented	the	Don	with	a small	truckload.
																“My	wife	was	weeping	before	she	fell	asleep,”	Don	Corleone	said. “Outside	my	window	I	saw	my	caporegimes	coming	to	the	house	and	it	is midnight.	So,	Consigliere	of	mine,	I	think	you	should	tell	your	Don	what everyone	knows.”
																Hagen	said	quietly,	“I	didn’t	tell	Mama	anything.	I	was	about	to	come up	and	wake	you	and	tell	you	the	news	myself.	In	another	moment	I	would	have come	to	waken	you.”
																Don	Corleone	said	impassively,	“But	you	needed	a	drink	first.”
																“Yes,”	Hagen	said.
																“You’ve	had	your	drink,”	the	Don	said.	“You	can	tell	me	now.”	There was	just	the	faintest	hint	of	reproach	for	Hagen’s	weakness.
																“They	shot	Sonny	on	the	causeway,”	Hagen	said.	“He’s	dead.”
																Don	Corleone	blinked.	For	just	the	fraction	of	a	second	the	wall	of	his will	disintegrated	and	the	draining	of	his	physical	strength	was	plain	on	his	face. Then	he	recovered.
																He	clasped	his	hands	in	front	of	him	on	top	of	the	desk	and	looked directly	into	Hagen’s	eyes.	“Tell	me	everything	that	happened,”	he	said.	He	held
up	one	of	his	hands.	“No,	wait	until	Clemenza	and	Tessio	arrive	so	you	won’t have	to	tell	it	all	again.”
																It	was	only	a	few	moments	later	that	the	two	caporegimes	were escorted	into	the	room	by	a	bodyguard.	They	saw	at	once	that	the	Don	knew about	his	son’s	death	because	the	Don	stood	up	to	receive	them.	They	embraced him	as	old	comrades	were	permitted	to	do.	They	all	had	a	drink	of	anisette	which Hagen	poured	them	before	he	told	them	the	story	of	that	night.
																Don	Corleone	asked	only	one	question	at	the	end.	“Is	it	certain	my	son is	dead?”
																Clemenza	answered.	“Yes,”	he	said.	“The	bodyguards	were	of Santino’s	regime	but	picked	by	me.	I	questioned	them	when	they	came	to	my house.	They	saw	his	body	in	the	light	of	the	tollhouse.	He	could	not	live	with	the wounds	they	saw.	They	place	their	lives	in	forfeit	for	what	they	say.”
																Don	Corleone	accepted	this	final	verdict	without	any	sign	of	emotion except	for	a	few	moments	of	silence.	Then	he	said,	“None	of	you	are	to	concern yourselves	with	this	affair.	None	of	you	are	to	commit	any	acts	of	vengeance, none	of	you	are	to	make	any	inquiries	to	track	down	the	murderers	of	my	son without	my	express	command.	There	will	be	no	further	acts	of	war	against	the Five	Families	without	my	express	and	personal	wish.	Our	Family	will	cease	all business	operations	and	cease	to	protect	any	of	our	business	operations	until after	my	son’s	funeral.	Then	we	will	meet	here	again	and	decide	what	must	be done.	Tonight	we	must	do	what	we	can	for	Santino,	we	must	bury	him	as	a Christian.	I	will	have	friends	of	mine	arrange	things	with	the	police	and	all	other proper	authorities.	Clemenza,	you	will	remain	with	me	at	all	times	as	my bodyguard,	you	and	the	men	of	your	regime.	Tessio,	you	will	guard	all	other members	of	my	Family.	Tom,	I	want	you	to	call	Amerigo	Bonasera	and	tell	him I	will	need	his	services	at	some	time	during	this	night.	To	wait	for	me	at	his establishment.	It	may	be	an	hour,	two	hours,	three	hours.	Do	you	all	understand that?”
																The	three	men	nodded.	Don	Corleone	said,	“Clemenza,	get	some	men and	cars	and	wait	for	me.	I	will	be	ready	in	a	few	minutes.	Tom,	you	did	well.	In
the	morning	I	want	Constanzia	with	her	mother.	Make	arrangements	for	her	and her	husband	to	live	in	the	mall.	Have	Sandra’s	friends,	the	women,	go	to	her house	to	stay	with	her.	My	wife	will	go	there	also	when	I	have	spoken	with	her. My	wife	will	tell	her	the	misfortune	and	the	women	will	arrange	for	the	church to	say	their	masses	and	prayers	for	his	soul.”
																The	Don	got	up	from	his	leather	armchair.	The	other	men	rose	with him	and	Clemenza	and	Tessio	embraced	him	again.	Hagen	held	the	door	open for	the	Don,	who	paused	to	look	at	him	for	a	moment.	Then	the	Don	put	his	hand on	Hagen’s	cheek,	embraced	him	quickly,	and	said,	in	Italian,	“You’ve	been	a good	son.	You	comfort	me.”	Telling	Hagen	that	be	had	acted	properly	in	this terrible	time.	The	Don	went	up	to	his	bedroom	to	speak	to	his	wife.	It	was	then that	Hagen	made	the	call	to	Amerigo	Bonasera	for	the	undertaker	to	redeem	the favor	he	owed	to	the	Corleones.