came	back.	The	tradespeople	in	his	precinct	appreciated	it.	And	they	showed their	appreciation.
																He	also	obeyed	the	system.	The	bookies	in	his	precinct	knew	he	would never	make	trouble	to	get	an	extra	payoff	for	himself,	that	he	was	content	with his	share	of	the	station	house	bag.	His	name	was	on	the	list	with	the	others	and he	never	tried	to	make	extras.	He	was	a	fair	cop	who	took	only	clean	graft	and his	rise	in	the	police	department	was	steady	if	not	spectacular.
																During	this	time	he	was	raising	a	large	family	of	four	sons,	none	of whom	became	policemen.	They	all	went	to	Fordham	University	and	since	by that	time	Mark	McCluskey	was	rising	from	sergeant	to	lieutenant	and	finally	to captain,	they	lacked	for	nothing.	It	was	at	this	time	that	McCluskey	got	the reputation	for	being	a	hard	bargainer.	The	bookmakers	in	his	district	paid	more protection	money	than	the	bookmakers	in	any	other	part	of	the	city,	but	maybe that	was	because	of	the	expense	of	putting	four	boys	through	college.
																McCluskey	himself	felt	there	was	nothing	wrong	with	clean	graft. Why	the	hell	should	his	kids	go	to	CCNY	or	a	cheap	Southern	college	just because	the	Police	Department	didn’t	pay	its	people	enough	money	to	live	on and	take	care	of	their	families	properly?	He	protected	all	these	people	with	his life	and	his	record	showed	his	citations	for	gun	duels	with	stickup	men	on	his beat,	strong-arm	protection	guys,	would-be	pimps.	He	had	hammered	them	into the	ground.	He	had	kept	his	little	corner	of	the	city	safe	for	ordinary	people	and he	sure	as	hell	was	entitled	to	more	than	his	lousy	one	C	note	a	week.	But	he wasn’t	indignant	about	his	low	pay,	he	understood	that	everybody	had	to	take care	of	themselves.
																Bruno	Tattaglia	was	an	old	friend	of	his.	Bruno	had	gone	to	Fordham with	one	of	his	sons	and	then	Bruno	had	opened	his	nightclub	and	whenever	the McCluskey	family	spent	an	infrequent	night	on	the	town,	they	could	enjoy	the cabaret	with	liquor	and	dinner--on	the	house.	On	New	Year’s	Eve	they	received engraved	invitations	to	be	guests	of	the	management	and	always	received	one	of the	best	tables.	Bruno	always	made	sure	they	were	introduced	to	the	celebrities who	performed	in	his	club,	some	of	them	famous	singers	and	Hollywood	stars. Of	course	sometimes	he	asked	a	little	favor,	like	getting	an	employee	with	a
record	cleared	for	a	cabaret	work	license,	usually	a	pretty	girl	with	a	police dossier	as	a	hustler	or	roller.	McCluskey	would	be	glad	to	oblige.
																McCluskey	made	it	a	policy	never	to	show	that	he	understood	what other	people	were	up	to.	When	Sollozzo	had	approached	him	with	the proposition	to	leave	old	man	Corleone	uncovered	in	the	hospital,	McCluskey didn’t	ask	why.	He	asked	price.	When	Sollozzo	said	ten	grand,	McCluskey	knew why.	He	did	not	hesitate.	Corleone	was	one	of	the	biggest	Mafia	men	in	the country	with	more	political	connections	than	Capone	had	ever	had.	Whoever knocked	him	off	would	be	doing	the	country	a	big	favor.	McCluskey	took	the money	in	advance	and	did	the	job.	When	he	received	a	call	from	Sollozzo	that there	were	still	two	of	Corleone’s	men	in	front	of	the	hospital	he	had	flown	into a	rage.	He	had	locked	up	all	of	Tessio’s	men,	he	had	pulled	the	detective	guards off	the	door	of	Corleone’s	hospital	room.	And	now,	being	a	man	of	principle,	he would	have	to	give	back	the	ten	grand,	money	he	had	already	earmarked	to insure	the	education	of	his	grandchildren.	It	was	in	that	rage	that	he	had	gone	to the	hospital	and	struck	Michael	Corleone.
																But	it	had	all	worked	out	for	the	best.	He	had	met	with	Sollozzo	in	the Tattaglia	nightclub	and	they	had	made	an	even	better	deal.	Again	McCluskey didn’t	ask	questions,	since	he	knew	all	the	answers.	He	just	made	sure	of	his price.	It	never	occurred	to	him	that	he	himself	could	be	in	any	danger.	That anyone	would	consider	even	for	a	moment	killing	a	New	York	City	police captain	was	too	fantastic.	The	toughest	hood	in	the	Mafia	had	to	stand	still	if	the lowliest	patrolman	decided	to	slap	him	around.	There	was	absolutely	no percentage	in	killing	cops.	Because	then	all	of	a	sudden	a	lot	of	hoods	were killed	resisting	arrest	or	escaping	the	scene	of	a	crime,	and	who	the	hell	was going	to	do	anything	about	that?
																McCluskey	sighed	and	got	ready	to	leave	the	station	house.	Problems, always	problems.	His	wife’s	sister	in	Ireland	had	just	died	after	many	years	of fighting	cancer	and	that	cancer	had	cost	him	a	pretty	penny.	Now	the	funeral would	cost	him	more.	His	own	uncles	and	aunts	in	the	old	country	needed	a	little help	now	and	then	to	keep	their	potato	farms	and	he	sent	the	money	to	do	the trick.	He	didn’t	begrudge	it.	And	when	he	and	his	wife	visited	the	old	country they	were	treated	like	a	king	and	queen.	Maybe	they	would	go	again	this
summer	now	that	the	war	was	over	and	with	all	this	extra	money	coming	in. McCluskey	told	his	patrolman	clerk	where	he	would	be	if	he	was	needed.	He	did not	feel	it	necessary	to	take	any	precautions.	He	could	always	claim	Sollozzo was	an	informer	he	was	meeting.	Outside	the	station	house	he	walked	a	few blocks	and	then	caught	a	cab	to	the	house	where	he	would	meet	with	Sollozzo.
	
																It	was	Tom	Hagen	who	had	to	make	all	the	arrangements	for Michael’s	leaving	the	country,	his	false	passport,	his	seaman’s	card,	his	berth	on an	Italian	freighter	that	would	dock	in	a	Sicilian	port.	Emissaries	were	sent	that very	day	by	plane	to	Sicily	to	prepare	a	hiding	place	with	the	Mafia	chief	in	the hill	country.
																Sonny	arranged	for	a	car	and	an	absolutely	trustworthy	driver	to	be waiting	for	Michael	when	he	stepped	out	of	the	restaurant	where	the	meeting would	be	held	with	Sollozzo.	The	driver	would	be	Tessio	himself,	who	had volunteered	for	the	job.	It	would	be	a	beat-up-looking	car	but	with	a	fine	motor. It	would	have	phony	license	plates	and	the	car	itself	would	be	untraceable.	It	had been	saved	for	a	special	job	requiring	the	best.
																Michael	spent	the	day	with	Clemenza,	practicing	with	the	small	gun that	would	be	gotten	to	him.	It	was	a	.22	filled	with	soft-nosed	bullets	that	made pinpricks	going	in	and	left	insulting	gaping	holes	when	they	exited	from	the human	body.	He	found	that	it	was	accurate	up	to	five	of	his	steps	away	from	a target.	After	that	the	bullets	might	go	anywhere.	The	trigger	was	tight	but Clemenza	worked	on	this	with	some	tools	so	that	it	pulled	easier.	They	decided to	leave	it	noisy.	They	didn’t	want	an	innocent	bystander	misunderstanding	the situation	and	interfering	out	of	ignorant	courage.	The	report	of	the	gun	would keep	them	away	from	Michael.
																Clemenza	kept	instructing	him	during	the	training	session.	“Drop	the gun	as	soon	as	you’ve	finished	using	it.	Just	let	your	hand	drop	to	your	side	and the	gun	slip	out.	Nobody	will	notice.	Everybody	will	think	you’re	still	armed. They’ll	be	staring	at	your	face.	Walk	out	of	the	place	very	quickly	but	don’t	run. Don’t	look	anybody	directly	in	the	eye	but	don’t	look	away	from	them	either.
Remember,	they’ll	be	scared	of	you,	believe	me,	they’ll	be	scared	of	you. Nobody	will	interfere.	As	soon	as	you’re	outside	Tessio	will	be	in	the	car waiting	for	you.	Get	in	and	leave	the	rest	to	him.	Don’t	be	worried	about accidents.	You’d	be	surprised	how	well	these	affairs	go.	Now	put	this	hat	on	and let’s	see	how	you	look.”	He	clapped	a	gray	fedora	on	Michael’s	head.	Michael, who	never	wore	a	hat,	grimaced.	Clemenza	reassured	him.	“It	helps	against identification,	just	in	case.	Mostly	it	gives	witnesses	an	excuse	to	change	their identification	when	we	make	them	see	the	light.	Remember,	Mike,	don’t	worry about	prints.	The	butt	and	trigger	are	fixed	with	special	tape.	Don’t	touch	any other	part	of	the	gun,	remember	that.”,
																Michael	said,	“Has	Sonny	found	out	where	Sollozzo	is	taking	me?”
																Clemenza	shrugged.	“Not	yet.	Sollozzo	is	being	very	careful.	But don’t	worry	about	him	harming	you.	The	negotiator	stays	in	our	hands	until	you come	back	safe.	If	anything	happens	to	you,	the	negotiator	pays.”
																“Why	the	hell	should	he	stick	his	neck	out?”	Michael	asked.
																“He	gets	a	big	fee,”	Clemenza	said.”	A	small	fortune.	Also	he	is	an important	man	in	the	Families.	He	knows	Sollozzo	can’t	let	anything	happen	to him.	Your	life	is	not	worth	the	negotiator’s	life	to	Sollozzo.	Very	simple.	You’ll be	safe	all	right.	We’re	the	ones	who	catch	hell	afterwards.”
																“How	bad	will	it	be?”	Michael	asked.
																“Very	bad,”	Clemenza	said.	“It	means	an	all-out	war	with	the	Tattaglia Family	against	the	Corleone	Family.	Most	of	the	others	will	line	up	with	the Tattaglias.	The	Sanitation	Department	will	be	sweeping	up	a	lot	of	dead	bodies this	winter.”	He	shrugged.	“These	things	have	to	happen	once	every	ten	years	or so.	It	gets	rid	of	the	bad	blood.	And	then	if	we	let	them	push	us	around	on	the little	things	they	wanta	take	over	everything.	You	gotta	stop	them	at	the beginning.	Like	they	shoulda	stopped	Hitler	at	Munich,	they	should	never	let him	get	away	with	that,	they	were	just	asking	for	big	trouble	when	they	let	him get	away	with	that.”
																Michael	had	heard	his	father	say	this	same	thing	before,	only	in	1939 before	the	war	actually	started.	If	the	Families	had	been	running	the	State Department	there	would	never	have	been	World	War	II,	he	thought	with	a	grin.
																They	drove	back	to	the	mall	and	to	the	Don’s	house,	where	Sonny	still made	his	headquarters.	Michael	wondered	how	long	Sonny	could	stay	cooped	up in	the	safe	territory	of	the	mall.	Eventually	he	would	have	to	venture	out.	They found	Sonny	taking	a	nap	on	the	couch.	On	the	coffee	table	was	the	remains	of his	late	lunch,	scraps	of	steak	and	bread	crumbs	and	a	half-empty	bottle	of whiskey.
																His	father’s	usually	neat	office	was	taking	on	the	look	of	a	badly	kept furnished	room.	Michael	shook	his	brother	awake	and	said,	“Why	don’t	you	stop living	like	a	bum	and	get	this	place	cleaned	up?
																Sonny	yawned.	“What	the	hell	are	you,	inspecting	the	barracks?	Mike, we	haven’t	got	the	word	yet	where	they	plan	to	take	you,	those	bastards	Sollozzo and	McCluskey.	If	we	don’t	find	that	out,	how	the	hell	are	we	going	to	get	the gun	to	you?”
																“Can’t	I	carry	it	on	me?	Michael	asked.	“Maybe	they	won’t	frisk	me and	even	if	they	do	maybe	they’ll	miss	it	if	we’re	smart	enough.	And	even	if they	find	it--so	what.	They’ll	just	take	it	off	me	and	no	harm	done.”
																Sonny	shook	his	head.	“Nah,”	he	said.	“We	have	to	make	this	a	sure hit	on	that	bastard	Sollozzo.	Remember,	get	him	first	if	you	possibly	can. McCluskey	is	slower	and	dumber.	You	should	have	plenty	of	time	to	take	him. Did	Clemenza	tell	you	to	be	sure	to	drop	the	gun?”
																“A	million	times,”	Michael	said.
																Sonny	got	up	from	the	sofa	and	stretched.	“How	does	your	jaw	feel, kid?”
																“Lousy,”	Michael	said.	The	left	side	of	his	face	ached	except	those parts	that	felt	numb	because	of	the	drugged	wire	holding	it	together.	He	took	the
bottle	of	whiskey	from	the	table	and	swigged	directly	from	it.	The	pain	eased.
																Sonny	said,	“Easy,	Mike,	now	is	no	time	to	get	slowed	up	by	booze.”
																Michael	said,	“Oh,	Christ,	Sonny,	stop	playing	the	big	brother.	I’ve been	in	combat	against	tougher	guys	than	Sollozzo	and	under	worse	conditions. Where	the	hell	are	his	mortars?	Has	he	got	air	cover?	Heavy	artillery?	Land mines?	He’s	just	a	wise	son	of	a	bitch	with	a	big-wheel	cop	sidekick.	Once anybody	makes	up	their	mind	to	kill	them	there’s	no	other	problem.	That’s	the hard	part,	making	up	your	mind.	They’ll	never	know	what	hit	them.”
																Tom	Hagen	came	into	the	room.	He	greeted	them	with	a	nod	and	went directly	to	the	falsely	listed	telephone.	He	called	a	few	times	and	then	shook	his head	at	Sonny.	“Not	a	whisper,	“	he	said.	“Sollozzo	is	keeping	it	to	himself	as long	as	he	can.”
																The	phone	rang.	Sonny	answered	it	and	he	held	up	a	hand	as	if	to signal	for	quiet	though	no	one	had	spoken.	He	jotted	some	notes	down	on	a	pad, then	said,	“OK,	he’ll	be	there,”	and	hung	up	the	phone.
																Sonny	was	laughing.	“That	son	of	a	bitch	Sollozzo,	he	really	is something.	Here’s	the	deal.	At	eight	tonight	he	and	Captain	McCluskey	pick	up Mike	in	front	of	Jack	Dempsey’s	bar	on	Broadway.	They	go	someplace	to	talk, and	get	this.	Mike	and	Sollozzo	talk	in	Italian	so	that	the	Irish	cop	don’t	know what	the	hell	they	are	talking	about.	He	even	tells	me,	don’t	worry,	he	knows McCluskey	doesn’t	know	one	word	in	Italian	unless	it’s	‘soldi’	and	he’s	checked you	out,	Mike,	and	knows	you	can	understand	Sicilian	dialect.”
																Michael	said	dryly,	“I’m	pretty	rusty	but	we	won’t	talk	long.”
																Tom	Hagen	said,	“We	don’t	let	Mike	go	until	we	have	the	negotiator. Is	that	arranged?”
																Clemenza	nodded.	“The	negotiator	is	at	my	house	playing	pinochle with	three	of	my	men.	They	wait	for	a	call	from	me	before	they	let	him	go.”
																Sonny	sank	back	in	the	leather	armchair.	“Now	how	the	hell	do	we find	out	the	meeting	place?	Tom,	we’ve	got	informers	with	the	Tattaglia	Family, how	come	they	haven’t	given	us	the	word?”
																Hagen	shrugged.	“Sollozzo	is	really	damn	smart.	He’s	playing	this close	to	the	vest,	so	close	that	he’s	not	using	any	men	as	a	cover.	He	figures	the captain	will	be	enough	and	that	security	is	more	important	than	guns.	He’s	right too.	We’ll	have	to	put	a	tail	on	Mike	and	hope	for	the	best.”
																Sonny	shook	his	head.	“Nah,	anybody	can	lose	a	tail	when	they	really want	to.	That’s	the	first	thing	they’ll	check	out.”
																By	this	time	it	was	five	in	the	afternoon.	Sonny,	with	a	worried	look on	his	face,	said,	“Maybe	we	should	just	let	Mike	blast	whoever	is	in	the	car when	it	tries	to	pick	him	up.”
																Hagen	shook	his	head.	“What	if	Sollozzo	is	not	in	the	car?	We’ve tipped	our	hand	for	nothing.	Damn	it,	we	have	to	find	out	where	Sollozzo	is taking	him.”
																Clemenza	put	in,	“Maybe	we	should	start	trying	to	figure	why	he’s making	it	such	a	big	secret.”
																Michael	said	impatiently,	“Because	it’s	the	percentage.	Why	should	he let	us	know	anything	if	he	can	prevent	it?	Besides,	he	smells	danger.	He	must	be leery	as	hell	even	with	that	police	captain	for	his	shadow.”
																Hagen	snapped	his	fingers.	“That	detective,	that	guy	Phillips.	Why don’t	you	give	him	a	ring,	Sonny?	Maybe	he	can	find	out	where	the	hell	the captain	can	be	reached.	It’s	worth	a	try.	McCluskey	won’t	give	a	damn	who knows	where	he’s	going.”
																Sonny	picked	up	the	phone	and	dialed	a	number.	He	spoke	softly	into the	phone,	then	hung	up.	“He’ll	call	us	back,”	Sonny	said.
																They	waited	for	nearly	another	thirty	minutes	and	then	the	phone	rang. It	was	Phillips.	Sonny	jotted	something	down	on	his	pad	and	then	hung	up.	His face	was	taut.	“I	think	we’ve	got	it,”	he	said.	“Captain	McCluskey	always	has	to leave	word	on	where	he	can	be	reached.	From	eight	to	ten	tonight	he’ll	be	at	the Luna	Azure	up	in	the	Bronx.	Anybody	know	it?”
																Tessio	spoke	confidently.	“I	do.	It’s	perfect	for	us.	A	small	family place	with	big	booths	where	people	can	talk	in	private.	Good	food.	Everybody minds	their	own	business.	Perfect.”	He	leaned	over	Sonny’s	desk	and	arranged stubbed-out	cigarettes	into	map	figures.	“This	is	the	entrance.	Mike,	when	you finish	just	walk	out	and	turn	left,	then	turn	the	corner.	I’ll	spot	you	and	put	on my	headlights	and	catch	you	on	the	fly.	If	you	have	any	trouble,	yell	and	I’ll	try to	come	in	and	get	you	out.	Clemenza,	you	gotta	work	fast.	Send	somebody	up there	to	plant	the	gun.	They	got	an	old-fashioned	toilet	with	a	space	between	the water	container	and	the	wall.	Have	your	man	tape	the	gun	behind	there.	Mike, after	they	frisk	you	in	the	car	and	find	you’re	clean,	they	won’t	be	too	worried about	you.	In	the	restaurant,	wait	a	bit	before	you	excuse	yourself.	No,	better still,	ask	permission	to	go.	Act	a	little	in	trouble	first,	very	natural.	They	can’t figure	anything.	But	when	you	come	out	again,	don’t	waste	any	time.	Don’t	sit down	again	at	the	table,	start	blasting.	And	don’t	take	chances.	In	the	head,	two shots	apiece,	and	out	as	fast	as	your	legs	can	travel.”
																Sonny	had	been	listening	judiciously.	“I	want	somebody	very	good, very	safe,	to	plant	that	gun,”	he	told	Clemenza.	“I	don’t	want	my	brother	coming out	of	that	toilet	with	just	his	dick	in	his	hand.”
																Clemenza	said	emphatically,	“The	gun	will	be	there.”
																“OK,”	Sonny	said.	“Everybody	get	rolling.”
																Tessio	and	Clemenza	left.	Tom	Hagen	said,	“Sonny,	should	I	drive Mike	down	to	New	York?”
																“No,”	Sonny	said.	“I	want	you	here.	When	Mike	finishes,	then	our work	begins	and	I’ll	need	you.	Have	you	got	those	newspaper	guys	lined	up?”
																Hagen	nodded.	“I’ll	be	feeding	them	info	as	soon	as	things	break.”
																Sonny	got	up	and	came	to	stand	in	front	of	Michael.	He	shook	his hand.	“OK,	kid,”	he	said,	“you’re	on.	I’ll	square	it	with	Mom	your	not	seeing	her before	you	left.	And	I’ll	get	a	message	to	your	girl	friend	when	I	think	the	time	is right.	OK?”
																“OK,”	Mike	said.	“How	long	do	you	think	before	I	can	come	back?”
																“At	least	a	year,”	Sonny	said.
																Tom	Hagen	put	in,	“The	Don	might	be	able	to	work	faster	than	that, Mike,	but	don’t	count	on	it.	The	time	element	hinges	on	a	lot	of	factors.	How well	we	can	plant	stories	with	the	newsmen.	How	much	the	Police	Department wants	to	cover	up.	How	violently	the	other	Families	react.	There’s	going	to	be	a hell	of	a	lot	of	heat	and	trouble.	That’s	the	only	thing	we	can	be	sure	of.”
																Michael	shook	Hagen’s	hand.	“Do	your	best,”	he	said.	“I	don’t	want	to do	another	three-year	stretch	away	from	home.”
																Hagen	said	gently,	“It’s	not	too	late	to	back	out,	Mike,	we	can	get somebody	else,	we	can	go	back	over	our	alternatives.	Maybe	it’s	not	necessary to	get	rid	of	Sollozzo.”
																Michael	laughed.	“We	can	talk	ourselves	into	any	viewpoint,”	he	said. “But	we	figured	it	right	the	first	time.	I’ve	been	riding	the	gravy	train	all	my	life, it’s	about	time	I	paid	my	dues.”
																“You	shouldn’t	let	that	broken	jaw	influence	you,”	Hagen	said. “McCluskey	is	a	stupid	man	and	it	was	business,	not	personal.”
																For	the	second	time	he	saw	Michael	Corleone’s	face	freeze	into	a mask	that	resembled	uncannily	the	Don’s.	“Tom,	don’t	let	anybody	kid	you.	It’s all	personal,	every	bit	of	business.	Every	piece	of	shit	every	man	has	to	eat	every day	of	his	life	is	personal.	They	call	it	business.	OK.	But	it’s	personal	as	hell.
You	know	where	I	learned	that	from?	The	Don.	My	old	man.	The	Godfather.	If	a bolt	of	lightning	hit	a	friend	of	his	the	old	man	would	take	it	personal.	He	took my	going	into	the	Marines	personal.	That’s	what	makes	him	great.	The	Great Don.	He	takes	everything	personal.	Like	God.	He	knows	every	feather	that	falls from	the	tail	of	a	sparrow	or	however	the	hell	it	goes.	Right?	And	you	know something?	Accidents	don’t	happen	to	people	who	take	accidents	as	a	personal insult.	So	I	came	late,	OK,	but	I’m	coming	all	the	way.	Damn	right,	I	take	that broken	jaw	personal;	damn	right,	I	take	Sollozzo	trying	to	kill	my	father personal.”	He	laughed.	“Tell	the	old	man	I	learned	it	all	from	him	and	that	I’m glad	I	had	this	chance	to	pay	him	back	for	all	he	did	for	me.	He	was	a	good father.”	He	paused	and	then	he	said	thoughtfully	to	Hagen,	“You	know,	I	can never	remember	him	hitting	me.	Or	Sonny.	Or	Freddie.	And	of	course	Connie, he	wouldn’t	even	yell	at	her.	And	tell	me	the	truth,	Tom,	how	many	men	do	you figure	the	Don	killed	or	had	killed.”
																Tom	Hagen	turned	away.	“I’ll	tell	you	one	thing	you	didn’t	learn	from him:	talking	the	way	you’re	talking	now.	There	are	things	that	have	to	be	done and	you	do	them	and	you	never	talk	about	them.	You	don’t	try	to	justify	them. They	can’t	be	justified.	You	just	do	them.	Then	you	forget	it.”
																Michael	Corleone	frowned.	He	said	quietly,	“	As	the	Consigliere,	you agree	that	it’s	dangerous	to	the	Don	and	our	Family	to	let	Sollozzo	live?
																“Yes,”	Hagen	said.
																“OK,”	Michael	said.	“Then	I	have	to	kill	him.”
																Michael	Corleone	stood	in	front	of	Jack	Dempsey’s	restaurant	on Broadway	and	waited	for	his	pickup.	He	looked	at	his	watch.	It	said	five	minutes to	eight.	Sollozzo	was	going	to	be	punctual.	Michael	had	made	sure	he	was	there in	plenty	of	time.	He	had	been	waiting	fifteen	minutes.
																All	during	the	ride	from	Long	Beach	into	the	city	he	had	been	trying	to forget	what	he	had	said	to	Hagen.	For	if	he	believed	what	he	said,	then	his	life was	set	on	an	irrevocable	course.	And	yet,	could	it	be	otherwise	after	tonight? He	might	be	dead	after	tonight	if	he	didn’t	stop	all	this	crap,	Michael	thought
grimly.	He	had	to	keep	his	mind	on	the	business	at	hand.	Sollozzo	was	no dummy	and	McCluskey	was	a	very	tough	egg.	He	felt	the	ache	in	his	wired	jaw and	welcomed	the	pain,	it	would	keep	him	alert.
																Broadway	wasn’t	that	crowded	on	this	cold	winter	night,	even	though it	was	near	theater	time.	Michael	flinched	as	a	long	black	car	pulled	up	to	the curb	and	the	driver,	leaning	over,	opened	the	front	door	and	said,	“Get	in,	Mike.” He	didn’t	know	the	driver,	a	young	punk	with	slick	black	hair	and	an	open	shirt, but	he	got	in.	In	the	back	seat	were	Captain	McCluskey	and	Sollozzo.
																Sollozzo	reached	a	hand	over	the	back	of	the	seat	and	Michael	shook it.	The	hand	was	firm,	warm	and	dry.	Sollozzo	said,	“I’m	glad	you	came,	Mike.	I hope	we	can	straighten	everything	out.	All	this	is	terrible,	it’s	not	the	way	I wanted	things	to	happen	at	all.	It	should	never	have	happened.”
																Michael	Corleone	said	quietly,	“I	hope	we	can	settle	things	tonight,	I don’t	want	my	father	bothered	any	more.”
																“He	won’t	be,”	Sollozzo	said	sincerely.	“I	swear	to	you	by	my	children he	won’t	be.	Just	keep	an	open	mind	when	we	talk.	I	hope	you’re	not	a	hothead like	your	brother	Sonny.	It’s	impossible	to	talk	business	with	him.”
																Captain	McCluskey	grunted.	“He’s	a	good	kid,	he’s	all	right.”	He leaned	over	to	give	Michael	an	affectionate	pat	on	the	shoulder.	“I’m	sorry	about the	other	night,	Mike.	I’m	getting	too	old	for	my	job,	too	grouchy.	I	guess	I’ll have	to	retire	pretty	soon.	Can’t	stand	the	aggravation,	all	day	I	get	aggravation. You	know	how	it	is.”	Then	with	a	doleful	sigh,	he	gave	Michael	a	thorough	frisk for	a	weapon.
																Michael	saw	a	slight	smile	on	the	driver’s	lips.	The	car	was	going	west with	no	apparent	attempt	to	elude	any	trailers.	It	went	up	on	to	the	West	Side Highway,	speeding	in	and	out	of	traffic.	Anyone	following	would	have	had	to	do the	same.	Then	to	Michael’s	dismay	it	took	the	exit	for	the	George	Washington Bridge,	they	were	going	over	to	New	Jersey.	Whoever	had	given	Sonny	the	info on	where	the	meeting	was	to	be	held	had	given	him	the	wrong	dope.