	It	was	a	dismissal.	The	men	rose.	Hagen	accompanied	Clemenza	and Tessio	to	their	cars	and	arranged	meetings	with	them	to	thrash	out	the operational	details	that	would	accomplish	the	stated	desires	of	their	Don.	Then he	went	back	into	the	house	where	he	knew	Don	Corleone	would	be	waiting	for him.
																The	Don	had	taken	off	his	jacket	and	tie	and	was	lying	down	on	the couch.	His	stern	face	was	relaxed	into	lines	of	fatigue.	He	waved	Hagen	into	a chair	and	said,	“Well,	Consigliere,	do	you	disapprove	of	any	of	my	deeds today?”
																Hagen	took	his	time	answering.	“No,”	he	said.	“But	I	don’t	find	it consistent,	nor	true	to	your	nature.	You	say	you	don’t	want	to	find	out	how Santino	was	killed	or	want	vengeance	for	it.	I	don’t	believe	that.	You	gave	your word	for	peace	and	so	you’ll	keep	the	peace	but	I	can’t	believe	you	will	give your	enemies	the	victory	they	seem	to	have	won	today.	You’ve	constructed	a magnificent	riddle	that	I	can’t	solve,	so	how	can	I	approve	or	disapprove?”
																A	look	of	content	came	over	the	Don’s	face.	“Well,	you	know	me better	than	anyone	else.	Even	though	you’re	not	a	Sicilian,	I	made	you	one. Everything	you	say	is	true,	but	there’s	a	solution	and	you’ll	comprehend	it before	it	spins	out	to	the	end.	You	agree	everyone	has	to	take	my	word	and	I’ll keep	my	word.	And	I	want	my	orders	obeyed	exactly.	But,	Tom,	the	most important	thing	is	we	have	to	get	Michael	home	as	soon	as	possible.	Make	that first	in	your	mind	and	in	your	work.	Explore	all	the	legal	alleys,	I	don’t	care	how much	money	you	have	to	spend.	It	has	to	be	foolproof	when	he	comes	home. Consult	the	best	lawyers	on	criminal	law.	I’ll	give	you	the	names	of	some	judges who	will	give	you	a	private	audience.	Until	that	time	we	have	to	guard	against all	treacheries.”
																Hagen	said,	“Like	you,	I’m	not	worried	so	much	about	the	real evidence	as	the	evidence	they	will	manufacture.	Also	some	police	friend	may kill	Michael	after	he’s	arrested.	They	may	kill	him	in	his	cell	or	have	one	of	the prisoners	do	it.	As	I	see	it,	we	can’t	even	afford	to	have	him	arrested	or accused.”
																Don	Corleone	sighed.	“I	know,	I	know.	That’s	the	difficulty.	But	we can’t	take	too	long.	There	are	troubles	in	Sicily.	The	young	fellows	over	there don’t	listen	to	their	elders	anymore	and	a	lot	of	the	men	deported	from	America are	just	too	much	for	the	old-fashioned	Dons	to	handle.	Michael	could	get	caught in	between.	I’ve	taken	some	precautions	against	that	and	he’s	still	got	a	good cover	but	that	cover	won’t	last	forever.	That’s	one	of	the	reasons	I	had	to	make the	peace.	Barzini	has	friends	in	Sicily	and	they	were	beginning	to	sniff Michael’s	trail.	That	gives	you	one	of	the	answers	to	your	riddle.	I	had	to	make the	peace	to	insure	my	son’s	safety.	There	was	nothing	else	to	do.”
																Hagen	didn’t	bother	asking	the	Don	how	he	had	gotten	this information.	He	was	not	even	surprised,	and	it	was	true	that	this	solved	part	of the	riddle.	“When	I	meet	with	Tattaglia’s	people	to	firm	up	the	details,	should	I insist	that	all	his	drug	middlemen	be	clean?	The	judges	will	be	a	little	skittish about	giving	light	sentences	to	a	man	with	a	record.”
																Don	Corleone	shrugged.	“They	should	be	smart	enough	to	figure	that out	themselves.	Mention	it,	don’t	insist.	We’ll	do	our	best	but	if	they	use	a	real snowbird	and	he	gets	caught,	we	won’t	lift	a	finger.	We’ll	just	tell	them	nothing can	be	done.	But	Barzini	is	a	man	who	will	know	that	without	being	told.	You notice	how	he	never	committed	himself	in	this	affair.	One	might	never	have known	he	was	in	any	way	concerned.	That	is	a	man	who	doesn’t	get	caught	on the	losing	side.”
																Hagen	was	startled.	“You	mean	he	was	behind	Sollozzo	and	Tattaglia all	the	time?”
																Don	Corleone	sighed.	“Tattaglia	is	a	pimp.	He	could	never	have outfought	Santino.	That’s	why	I	don’t	have	to	know	about	what	happened.	It’s enough	to	know	that	Barzini	had	a	hand	in	it.”
																Hagen	let	this	sink	in.	The	Don	was	giving	him	clues	but	there	was something	very	important	left	out.	Hagen	knew	what	it	was	but	he	knew	it	was not	his	place	to	ask.	He	said	good	night	and	turned	to	go.	The	Don	had	a	last word	for	him.
																“Remember,	use	all	your	wits	for	a	plan	to	bring	Michael	home.”	the Don	said.	“And	one	other	thing.	Arrange	with	the	telephone	man	so	that	every month	I	get	a	list	of	all	the	telephone	calls,	made	and	received,	by	Clemenza	and Tessio.	I	suspect	them	of	nothing.	I	would	swear	they	would	never	betray	me. But	there’s	no	harm	in	knowing	any	little	thing	that	may	help	us	before	the event.”
																Hagen	nodded	and	went	out.	He	wondered	if	the	Don	was	keeping	a check	on	him	also	in	some	way	and	then	was	ashamed	of	his	suspicion.	But	now he	was	sure	that	in	the	subtle	and	complex	mind	of	the	Godfather	a	far-ranging plan	of	action	was	being	initiated	that	made	the	day’s	happenings	no	more	than	a tactical	retreat.	And	there	was	that	one	dark	fact	that	no	one	mentioned,	that	he himself	had	not	dared	to	ask,	that	Don	Corleone	ignored.	All	pointed	to	a	day	of reckoning	in	the	future.
	
Chapter	21
	
																But	it	was	to	be	nearly	another	year	before	Don	Corleone	could arrange	for	his	son	Michael	to	be	smuggled	back	into	the	United	States.	During that	time	the	whole	Family	racked	their	brains	for	suitable	schemes.	Even	Carlo Rizzi	was	listened	to	now	that	he	was	living	in	the	mall	with	Connie.	(During that	time	they	had	a	second	child,	a	boy.)	But	none	of	the	schemes	met	with	the Don’s	approval.
																Finally	it	was	the	Bocchicchio	Family	who	through	a	misfortune	of	its own	solved	the	problem.	There	was	one	Bocchicchio,	a	young	cousin	of	no	more than	twenty-five	years	of	age,	named	Felix,	who	was	born	in	America	and	with more	brains	than	anyone	in	the	clan	had	ever	had	before.	He	had	refused	to	be drawn	into	the	Family	garbage	hauling	business	and	married	a	nice	American girl	of	English	stock	to	further	his	split	from	the	clan.	He	went	to	school	at	night, to	become	a	lawyer,	and	worked	during	the	day	as	a	civil	service	post	office clerk.	During	that	time	he	had	three	children	but	his	wife	was	a	prudent	manager
and	they	lived	on	his	salary	until	he	got	his	law	degree.
																Now	Felix	Bocchicchio,	like	many	young	men,	thought	that	having struggled	to	complete	his	education	and	master	the	tools	of	his	profession,	his virtue	would	automatically	be	rewarded	and	he	would	earn	a	decent	living.	This proved	not	to	be	the	case.	Still	proud,	he	refused	all	help	from	his	clan.	But	a lawyer	friend	of	his,	a	young	man	well	connected	and	with	a	budding	career	in	a big	law	firm,	talked	Felix	into	doing	him	a	little	favor.	It	was	very	complicated, seemingly	legal,	and	had	to	do	with	a	bankruptcy	fraud.	It	was	a	million-to-one shot	against	its	being	found	out.	Felix	Bocchicchio	took	the	chance.	Since	the fraud	involved	using	the	legal	skills	he	had	learned	in	a	university,	it	seemed	not so	reprehensible,	and,	in	an	odd	way,	not	even	criminal.
																To	make	a	foolish	story	short,	the	fraud	was	discovered.	The	lawyer friend	refused	to	help	Felix	in	any	manner,	refused	to	even	answer	his	telephone calls.	The	two	principals	in	the	fraud,	shrewd	middle-aged	businessmen	who furiously	blamed	Felix	Bocchicchio’s	legal	clumsiness	for	the	plan	going	awry, pleaded	guilty	and	cooperated	with	the	state,	naming	Felix	Bocchicchio	as	the ringleader	of	the	fraud	and	claiming	he	had	used	threats	of	violence	to	control their	business	and	force	them	to	cooperate	with	him	in	his	fraudulent	schemes. Testimony	was	given	that	linked	Felix	with	uncles	and	cousins	in	the Bocchicchio	clan	who	had	criminal	records	for	strong-arm,	and	this	evidence was	damning.	The	two	businessmen	got	off	with	suspended	sentences.	Felix Bocchicchio	was	given	a	sentence	of	one	to	five	years	and	served	three	of	them. The	clan	did	not	ask	help	from	any	of	the	Families	or	Don	Corleone	because Felix	had	refused	to	ask	their	help	and	had	to	be	taught	a	lesson:	that	mercy comes	only	from	the	Family,	that	the	Family	is	more	loyal	and	more	to	be trusted	than	society.
																In	any	case,	Felix	Bocchicchio	was	released	from	prison	after	serving three	years,	went	home	and	kissed	his	wife	and	three	children	and	lived peacefully	for	a	year,	and	then	showed	that	he	was	of	the	Bocchicchio	clan	after all.	Without	any	attempt	to	conceal	his	guilt,	he	procured	a	weapon,	a	pistol,	and shot	his	lawyer	friend	to	death.	He	then	searched	out	the	two	businessmen	and calmly	shot	them	both	through	the	head	as	they	came	out	of	a	luncheonette.	He left	the	bodies	lying	in	the	street	and	went	into	the	luncheonette	and	ordered	a
cup	of	coffee	which	he	drank	while	he	waited	for	the	police	to	come	and	arrest him.
																His	trial	was	swift	and	his	judgment	merciless.	A	member	of	the criminal	underworld	had	cold-bloodedly	murdered	state	witnesses	who	had	sent him	to	the	prison	he	richly	deserved.	It	was	a	flagrant	flouting	of	society	and	for once	the	public,	the	press,	the	structure	of	society	and	even	softheaded	and	softhearted	humanitarians	were	united	in	their	desire	to	see	Felix	Bocchicchio	in	the electric	chair.	The	governor	of	the	state	would	no	more	grant	him	clemency	than the	officials	of	the	pound	spare	a	mad	dog,	which	was	the	phrase	of	one	of	the governor’s	closest	political	aides.	The	Bocchicchio	clan	of	course	would	spend whatever	money	was	needed	for	appeals	to	higher	courts,	they	were	proud	of him	now,	but	the	conclusion	was	certain.	After	the	legal	folderol,	which	might take	a	little	time,	Felix	Bocchicchio	would	die	in	the	electric	chair.
																It	was	Hagen	who	brought	this	case	to	the	attention	of	the	Don	at	the request	of	one	of	the	Bocchicchios	who	hoped	that	something	could	be	done	for the	young	man.	Don	Corleone	curtly	refused.	He	was	not	a	magician.	People asked	him	the	impossible.	But	the	next	day	the	Don	called	Hagen	into	his	office and	had	him	go	over	the	case	in	the	most	intimate	detail.	When	Hagen	was finished,	Don	Corleone	told	him	to	summon	the	head	of	the	Bocchicchio	clan	to the	mall	for	a	meeting.
																What	happened	next	had	the	simplicity	of	genius.	Don	Corleone guaranteed	to	the	head	of	the	Bocchicchio	clan	that	the	wife	and	children	of Felix	Bocchicchio	would	be	rewarded	with	a	handsome	pension.	The	money	for this	would	be	handed	over	to	the	Bocchicchio	clan	immediately.	In	turn,	Felix must	confess	to	the	murder	of	Sollozzo	and	the	police	captain	McCluskey.
																There	were	many	details	to	be	arranged.	Felix	Bocchicchio	would have	to	confess	convincingly,	that	is,	he	would	have	to	know	some	of	the	true details	to	confess	to.	Also	he	must	implicate	the	police	captain	in	narcotics.	Then the	waiter	at	the	Luna	Restaurant	must	be	persuaded	to	identify	Felix Bocchicchio	as	the	murderer.	This	would	take	some	courage,	as	the	description would	change	radically,	Felix	Bocchicchio	being	much	shorter	and	heavier.	But Don	Corleone	would	attend	to	that.	Also,	since	the	condemned	man	had	been	a
great	believer	in	higher	education	and	a	college	graduate,	he	would	want	his children	to	go	to	college.	And	so	a	sum	of	money	would	have	to	be	paid	by	Don Corleone	that	would	take	care	of	the	children’s	college.	Then	the	Bocchicchio clan	had	to	be	reassured	that	there	was	no	hope	for	clemency	on	the	original murders.	The	new	confession	of	course	would	seal	the	man’s	already	almost certain	doom.
																Everything	was	arranged,	the	money	paid	and	suitable	contact	made with	the	condemned	man	so	that	he	could	be	instructed	and	advised.	Finally	the plan	was	sprung	and	the	confession	made	headlines	in	all	the	newspapers.	The whole	thing	was	a	huge	success.	But	Don	Corleone,	cautious	as	always,	waited until	Felix	Bocchicchio	was	actually	executed	four	months	later	before	finally giving	the	command	that	Michael	Corleone	could	return	home.
															
Chapter	22
	
																Lucy	Mancini,	a	year	after	Sonny’s	death,	still	missed	him	terribly, grieved	for	him	more	fiercely	than	any	lover	in	any	romance.	And	her	dreams were	not	the	insipid	dreams	of	a	schoolgirl,	her	longings	not	the	longings	of	a devoted	wife.	She	was	not	rendered	desolate	by	the	loss	of	her	“life’s companion,”	or	miss	him	because	of	his	stalwart	character.	She	held	no	fond remembrances	of	sentimental	gifts,	of	girlish	hero	worship,	his	smile,	the amused	glint	of	his	eyes	when	she	said	something	endearing	or	witty.
																No.	She	missed	him	for	the	more	important	reason	that	he	had	been	the only	man	in	the	world	who	could	make	her	body	achieve	the	act	of	love.	And,	in her	youth	and	innocence,	she	still	believed	that	he	was	the	only	man	who	could possibly	do	so.
																Now	a	year	later	she	sunned	herself	in	the	balmy	Nevada	air.	At	her feet	the	slender,	blond	young	man	was	playing	with	her	toes.	They	were	at	the side	of	the	hotel	pool	for	the	Sunday	afternoon	and	despite	the	people	all	around
them	his	hand	was	sliding	up	her	bare	thigh.
																“Oh,	Jules,	stop,”	Lucy	said.	“I	thought	doctors	at	least	weren’t	as	silly as	other	men.”
																Jules	grinned	at	her.	“I’m	a	Las	Vegas	doctor.”	He	tickled	the	inside	of her	thigh	and	was	amazed	how	just	a	little	thing	like	that	could	excite	her	so powerfully.	It	showed	on	her	face	though	she	tried	to	hide	it.	She	was	really	a very	primitive,	innocent	girl.	Then	why	couldn’t	he	make	her	come	across?	He had	to	figure	that	one	out	and	never	mind	the	crap	about	a	lost	love	that	could never	be	replaced.	This	was	living	tissue	here	under	his	hand	and	living	tissue required	other	living	tissue.	Dr.	Jules	Segal	decided	he	would	make	the	big	push tonight	at	his	apartment.	He’d	wanted	to	make	her	come	across	without	any trickery	but	if	trickery	there	had	to	be,	he	was	the	man	for	it.	All	in	the	interests of	science	of	course.	And,	besides,	this	poor	kid	was	dying	for	it.
																“Jules,	stop,	please	stop,”	Lucy	said.	Her	voice	was	trembling.
																Jules	was	immediately	contrite.	“OK,	honey,”	he	said.	He	put	his	head in	her	lap	and	using	her	soft	thighs	as	a	pillow,	he	took	a	little	nap.	He	was amused	at	her	squirming,	the	heat	that	registered	from	her	loins	and	when	she put	her	hand	on	his	head	to	smooth	his	hair,	he	grasped	her	wrist	playfully	and held	it	lover-like	but	really	to	feel	her	pulse.	It	was	galloping.	He’d	get	her tonight	and	he’d	solve	the	mystery,	what	the	hell	ever	it	was.	Fully	confident, Dr.	Jules	Segal	fell	asleep.
																Lucy	watched	the	people	around	the	pool.	She	could	never	have imagined	her	life	would	change	so	in	less	than	two	years.	She	never	regretted	her “foolishness”	at	Connie	Corleone’s	wedding.	It	was	the	most	wonderful	thing that	had	ever	happened	to	her	and	she	lived	it	over	and	over	again	in	her	dreams. As	she	lived	over	and	over	again	the	months	that	followed.
																Sonny	had	visited	her	once	a	week,	sometimes	more,	never	less.	The days	before	she	saw	him	again	her	body	was	in	torment.	Their	passion	for	each other	was	of	the	most	elementary	kind,	undiluted	by	poetry	or	any	form	of intellectualism.	It	was	love	of	the	coarsest	nature,	a	fleshly	love,	a	love	of	tissue
for	opposing	tissue.
																When	Sonny	called	to	her	he	was	coming	she	made	certain	there	was enough	liquor	in	the	apartment	and	enough	food	for	supper	and	breakfast because	usually	he	would	not	leave	until	late	the	next	morning.	He	wanted	his fill	of	her	as	she	wanted	her	fill	of	him.	He	had	his	own	key	and	when	he	came in	the	door	she	would	fly	into	his	massive	arms.	They	would	both	be	brutally direct,	brutally	primitive.	During	their	first	kiss	they	would	be	fumbling	at	each other’s	clothing	and	he	would	be	lifting	her	in	the	air,	and	she	would	be wrapping	her	legs	around	his	huge	thighs.	They	would	be	making	love	standing up	in	the	foyer	of	her	apartment	as	if	they	had	to	repeat	their	first	act	of	love together,	and	then	he	would	carry	her	so	to	the	bedroom.
																They	would	lie	in	bed	making	love.	They	would	live	together	in	the apartment	for	sixteen	hours,	completely	naked.	She	would	cook	for	him, enormous	meals.	Sometimes	he	would	get	phone	calls	obviously	about	business but	she	never	even	listened	to	the	words.	She	would	be	too	busy	toying	with	his body,	fondling	it,	kissing	it,	burying	her	mouth	in	it.	Sometimes	when	he	got	up to	get	a	drink	and	he	walked	by	her,	she	couldn’t	help	reaching	out	to	touch	his naked	body,	hold	him,	make	love	to	him	as	if	those	special	parts	of	his	body were	a	plaything,	a	specially	constructed,	intricate	but	innocent	toy	revealing	its known,	but	still	surprising	ecstasies.	At	first	she	had	been	ashamed	of	these excesses	on	her	part	but	soon	saw	that	they	pleased	her	lover,	that	her	complete sensual	enslavement	to	his	body	flattered	him.	In	all	this	there	was	an	animal innocence.	They	were	happy	together.
																When	Sonny’s	father	was	gunned	down	in	the	street,	she	understood for	the	first	time	that	her	lover	might	be	in	danger.	Alone	in	her	apartment,	she did	not	weep,	she	wailed	aloud,	an	animal	wailing.	When	Sonny	did	not	come	to see	her	for	almost	three	weeks	she	subsisted	on	sleeping	pills,	liquor	and	her own	anguish.	The	pain	she	felt	was	physical	pain,	her	body	ached.	When	he finally	did	come	she	held	on	to	his	body	at	almost	every	moment.	After	that	he came	at	least	once	a	week	until	he	was	killed.
																She	learned	of	his	death	through	the	newspaper	accounts	and	that	very same	night	she	took	a	massive	overdose	of	sleeping	pills.	For	some	reason,
instead	of	killing,	the	pills	made	her	so	ill	that	she	staggered	out	into	the	hall	of her	apartment	and	collapsed	in	front	of	the	elevator	door	where	she	was	found and	taken	to	the	hospital.	Her	relationship	to	Sonny	was	not	generally	known	so her	case	received	only	a	few	inches	in	the	tabloid	newspapers.
																It	was	while	she	was	in	the	hospital	that	Tom	Hagen	came	to	see	her and	console	her.	It	was	Tom	Hagen	who	arranged	a	job	for	her	in	Las	Vegas working	in	the	hotel	run	by	Sonny’s	brother	Freddie.	It	was	Tom	Hagen	who told	her	that	she	would	receive	an	annuity	from	the	Corleone	Family,	that	Sonny had	made	provisions	for	her.	He	had	asked	her	if	she	was	pregnant,	as	if	that were	the	reason	for	her	taking	the	pills	and	she	had	told	him	no.	He	asked	her	if Sonny	had	come	to	see	her	that	fatal	night	or	had	called	that	he	would	come	to see	her	and	she	told	him	no,	that	Sonny	had	not	called.	That	she	was	always home	waiting	for	him	when	she	finished	working.	And	she	had	told	Hagen	the truth.	“He’s	the	only	man	I	could	ever	love,”	she	said.	“I	can’t	love	anybody else.”	She	saw	him	smile	a	little	but	he	also	looked	surprised.	“Do	you	find	that so	unbelievable?”	she	asked.	“Wasn’t	he	the	one	who	brought	you	home	when you	were	a	kid?”
																“He	was	a	different	person,”	Hagen	said,	“he	grew	up	to	be	a	different kind	of	man.”
																“Not	to	me,”	Lucy	said.	“Maybe	to	everybody	else,	but	not	to	me.” She	was	still	too	weak	to	explain	how	Sonny	had	never	been	anything	but	gentle with	her.	He’d	never	been	angry	with	her,	never	even	irritable	or	nervous.
																Hagen	made	all	the	arrangements	for	her	to	move	to	Las	Vegas.	A rented	apartment	was	waiting,	he	took	her	to	the	airport	himself	and	he	made	her promise	that	if	she	ever	felt	lonely	or	if	things	didn’t	go	right,	she	would	call	him and	he	would	help	her	in	any	way	he	could.
																Before	she	got	on	the	plane	she	asked	him	hesitantly,	“Does	Sonny’s father	know	what	you’re	doing?”
																Hagen	smiled,	“I’m	acting	for	him	as	well	as	myself.	He’s	oldfashioned	in	these	things	and	he	would	never	go	against	the	legal	wife	of	his	son.
But	he	feels	that	you	were	just	a	young	girl	and	Sonny	should	have	known better.	And	your	taking	all	those	pills	shook	everybody	up.”	He	didn’t	explain how	incredible	it	was	to	a	man	like	the	Don	that	any	person	should	try	suicide.
																Now,	after	nearly	eighteen	months	in	Las	Vegas,	she	was	surprised	to find	herself	almost	happy.	Some	nights	she	dreamed	about	Sonny	and	lying awake	before	dawn	continued	her	dream	with	her	own	caresses	until	she	could sleep	again.	She	had	not	had	a	man	since.	But	the	life	in	Vegas	agreed	with	her. She	went	swimming	in	the	hotel	pools,	sailed	on	Lake	Mead	and	drove	through the	desert	on	her	day	off.	She	became	thinner	and	this	improved	her	figure.	She was	still	voluptuous	but	more	in	the	American	than	the	old	Italian	style.	She worked	in	the	public	relations	section	of	the	hotel	as	a	receptionist	and	had nothing	to	do	with	Freddie	though	when	he	saw	her	he	would	stop	and	chat	a little.	She	was	surprised	at	the	change	in	Freddie.	He	had	become	a	ladies’	man, dressed	beautifully,	and	seemed	to	have	a	real	flair	for	running	a	gambling resort.	He	controlled	the	hotel	side,	something	not	usually	done	by	casino owners.	With	the	long,	very	hot	summer	seasons,	or	perhaps	his	more	active	sex life,	he	too	had	become	thinner	and	Hollywood	tailoring	made	him	look	almost debonair	in	a	deadly	sort	of	way.
																It	was	after	six	months	that	Tom	Hagen	came	out	to	see	how	she	was doing.	She	had	been	receiving	a	check	for	six	hundred	dollars	a	month,	every month,	in	addition	to	her	salary.	Hagen	explained	that	this	money	had	to	be shown	as	coming	from	someplace	and	asked	her	to	sign	complete	powers	of attorney	so	that	he	could	channel	the	money	properly.	He	also	told	her	that	as	a matter	of	form	she	would	be	listed	as	owner	of	five	“points”	in	the	hotel	in which	she	worked.	She	would	have	to	go	through	all	the	legal	formalities required	by	the	Nevada	laws	but	everything	would	be	taken	care	of	for	her	and her	own	personal	inconvenience	would	be	at	a	minimum.	However	she	was	not to	discuss	this	arrangement	with	anyone	without	his	consent.	She	would	be protected	legally	in	every	way	and	her	money	every	month	would	be	assured.	If the	authorities	or	any	law-enforcement	agencies	ever	questioned	her,	she	was	to simply	refer	them	to	her	lawyer	and	she	would	not	be	bothered	any	further.
																Lucy	agreed.	She	understood	what	was	happening	but	had	no objections	to	how	she	was	being	used.	It	seemed	a	reasonable	favor.	But	when