with	her.	Did	she?”
																Nino	shook	his	head.	“I	got	too	interested	in	the	movie,”	he	said.	But this	time	Johnny	didn’t	laugh.
																“Get	serious,	kid,”	he	said.”	A	dame	like	that	can	do	you	a	lot	of	good. And	you	used	to,	boff	anything.	Man,	sometimes	I	still	get	nightmares	when	I remember	those	ugly	broads	you	used	to	bang.”
																Nino	waved	his	glass	drunkenly	and	said	very	loud,	“Yeah,	they	were ugly	but	they	were	women.”	Deanna	Dunn,	in	the	corner,	turned	her	head	to	look at	them.	Nino	waved	his	glass	at	her	in	greeting.
																Johnny	Fontane	sighed.	“OK,	you’re	just	a	guinea	peasant.”
																“And	I	ain’t	gonna	change,”	Nino	said	with	his	charmingly	drunken smile.
																Johnny	understood	him	perfectly.	He	knew	Nino	was	not	as	drunk	as he	pretended.	He	knew	that	Nino	was	only	pretending	so	that	he	could	say	things which	he	felt	were	too	rude	to	say	to	his	new	Hollywood	padrone	when	sober. He	put	his	arm	around	Nino’s	neck	and	said	affectionately,	“You	wise	guy	bum, you	know	you	got	an	ironclad	contract	for	a	year	and	you	can	say	and	do anything	you	want	and	I	can’t	fire	you.”
																“You	can’t	fire	me?”	Nino	said	with	drunken	cunning.
																“No,”	Johnny	said.
																“Then	fuck	you,”	Nino	said.
																For	a	moment	Johnny	was	surprised	into	anger.	He	saw	the	careless grin	on	Nino’s	face.	But	in	the	past	few	years	he	must	have	gotten	smarter,	or	his own	descent	from	stardom	had	made	him	more	sensitive.	In	that	moment	he understood	Nino,	why	his	boyhood	singing	partner	had	never	become	successful,
why	he	was	trying	to	destroy	any	chance	of	success	now.	That	Nino	was	reacting away	from	all	the	prices	of	success,	that	in	some	way	he	felt	insulted	by everything	that	was	being	done	for	him.
																Johnny	took	Nino	by	the	arm	and	led	him	out	of	the	house.	Nino	could barely	walk	now.	Johnny	was	talking	to	him	soothingly.	“OK,	kid,	you	just	sing for	me,	I	wanta	make	dough	on	you.	I	won’t	try	to	run	your	life.	You	do whatever	you	wanta	do.	OK,	paisan?	All	you	gotta	do	is	sing	for	me	and	earn me	money	now	that	I	can’t	sing	anymore.	You	got	that,	old	buddy?”
																Nino	straightened	up.	“I’ll	sing	for	you,	Johnny,”	he	said,	his	voice slurring	so	that	he	could	barely	be	understood.	“I’m	a	better	singer	than	you now.	I	was	always	a	better	singer	than	you,	you	know	that?”
																Johnny	stood	there	thinking;	so	that	was	it.	He	knew	that	when	his voice	was	healthy	Nino	simply	wasn’t	in	the	same	league	with	him,	never	had been	in	those	years	they	had	sung	together	as	kids.	He	saw	Nino	was	waiting	for an	answer,	weaving	drunkenly	in	the	California	moonlight.	“Fuck	you,”	he	said gently,	and	they	both	laughed	together	like	the	old	days	when	they	had	both	been equally	young.
	
																When	Johnny	Fontane	got	word	about	the	shooting	of	Don	Corleone he	not	only	worried	about	his	Godfather,	but	also	wondered	whether	the financing	for	his	movie	was	still	alive.	He	had	wanted	to	go	to	New	York	to	pay his	respects	to	his	Godfather	in	the	hospital	but	he	had	been	told	not	to	get	any bad	publicity,	that	was	the	last	thing	Don	Corleone	would	want.	So	he	waited.	A week	later	a	messenger	came	from	Tom	Hagen.	The	financing	was	still	on	but for	only	one	picture	at	a	time.
																Meanwhile	Johnny	let	Nino	go	his	own	way	in	Hollywood	and California,	and	Nino	was	doing	all	right	with	the	young	starlets.	Sometimes Johnny	called	him	up	for	a	night	out	together	but	never	leaned	on	him.	When they	talked	about	the	Don	getting	shot,	Nino	said	to	Johnny,	“You	know,	once	I asked	the	Don	for	a	job	in	his	organization	and	he	wouldn’t	give	it	to	me.	I	was
tired	of	driving	a	truck	and	I	wanted	to	make	a	lot	of	dough.	You	know	what	he told	me?	He	says	every	man	has	only	one	destiny	and	that	my	destiny	was	to	be an	artist.	Meaning	that	I	couldn’t	be	a	racket	guy.”
																Johnny	thought	that	one	over.	The	Godfather	must	be	just	about	the smartest	guy	in	the	world.	He’d	known	immediately	that	Nino	could	never	make a	racket	guy,	would	only	get	himself	in	trouble	or	get	killed.	Get	killed	with	just one	of	his	wisecracks.	But	how	did	the	Don	know	that	he	would	be	an	artist? Because,	goddamn	it,	he	figured	that	someday	I’d	help	Nino.	And	how	did	he, figure	that?	Because	he	would	drop	the	word	to	me	and	I	would	try	to	show	my gratitude.	Of	course	he	never	asked	me	to	do	it.	He	just	let	me	know	it	would make	him	happy	if	I	did	it.	Johnny	Fontane	sighed.	Now	the	Godfather	was	hurt, in	trouble,	and	he	could	kiss	the	Academy	Award	good-bye	with	Woltz	working against	him	and	no	help	on	his	side.	Only	the	Don	had	the	personal	contacts	that could	apply	pressure	and	the	Corleone	Family	had	other	things	to	think	about. Johnny	had	offered	to	help,	Hagen	had	given	him	a	curt	no.
																Johnny	was	busy	getting	his	own	picture	going.	The	author	of	the	book he	had	starred	in	had	finished	his	new	novel	and	came	west	on	Johnny’s invitation,	to	talk	it	over	without	agents	or	studios	getting	into	the	act.	The second	book	was	perfect	for	what	Johnny	wanted.	He	wouldn’t	have	to	sing,	it had	a	good	gutsy	story	with	plenty	of	dames	and	sex	and	it	had	a	part	that Johnny	instantly	recognized	as	tailor-made	for	Nino.	The	character	talked	like Nino,	acted	like	him,	even	looked	like	him.	It	was	uncanny.	All	Nino	would have	to	do	would	be	to	get	up	on	the	screen	and	be	himself.
																Johnny	worked	fast.	He	found	that	he	knew	a	lot	more	about production	than	he	thought	he	did,	but	he	hired	an	executive	producer,	a	man who	knew	his	stuff	but	had	trouble	finding	work	because	of	the	blacklist.	Johnny didn’t	take	advantage	but	gave	the	man	a	fair	contract.	“I	expect	you	to	save	me more	dough	this	way,”	he	told	the	man	frankly.
																So	he	was	surprised	when	the	executive	producer	came	to	him	and	told him	the	union	rep	had	to	be	taken	care	of	to	the	tune	of	fifty	thousand	dollars. There	were	a	lot	0[	problems	dealing	with	overtime	and	hiring	and	the	fifty thousand	dollars	would	be	well	spent.	Johnny	debated	whether	the	executive
producer	was	hustling	him	and	then	said,	“Send	the	union	guy	to	me.”
																The	union	guy	was	Billy	Goff.	Johnny	said	to	him,	“I	thought	the union	stuff	was	fixed	by	my	friends.	I	was	told	not	to	worry	about	it.	At	all.”
																Goff	said,	“Who	told	you	that?”
																Johnny	said,	“You	know	goddamn	well	who	told	me.	I	won’t	say	his name	but	if	he	tells	me	something	that’s	it.”
																Goff	said,	“Things	have	changed.	Your	friend	is	in	trouble	and	his word	don’t	go	this	far	west	anymore.”
																Johnny	shrugged.	“See	me	in	a	couple	of	days.	OK?”
																Goff	smiled.	“Sure,	Johnny,”	he	said.	“But	calling	in	New	York	ain’t going	to	help	you.”
																But	calling	New	York	did	help.	Johnny	spoke	to	Hagen	at	his	office. Hagen	told	him	bluntly	not	to	pay.	“Your	Godfather	will	be	sore	as	hell	if	you pay	that	bastard	a	dime,”	he	told	Johnny.	“It	will	make	the	Don	lose	respect	and right	now	he	can’t	afford	that.”
																“Can	I	talk	to	the	Don?”	Johnny	asked.	“Will	you	talk	to	him?	I	gotta get	the	picture	rolling.”
																“Nobody	can	talk	to	the	Don	right	now,”	Hagen	said.	“He’s	too	sick. I’ll	talk	to	Sonny	about	fixing	things	up.	But	I’ll	make	the	decision	on	this. Don’t	pay	that	smart	bastard	a	dime.	If	anything	changes,	I’ll	let	you	know.”
																Annoyed,	Johnny	hung	up.	Union	trouble	could	add	a	fortune	to making	the	film	and	screw	up	the	works	generally.	For	a	moment	he	debated slipping	Goff	the	fifty	grand	on	the	quiet.	After	all,	the	Don	telling	him something	and	Hagen	telling	him	something	and	giving	him	orders	were	two different	things.	But	he	decided	to	wait	for	a	few	days.
																By	waiting	he	saved	fifty	thousand	dollars.	Two	nights	later,	Goff	was found	shot	to	death	in	his	home	in	Glendale.	There	was	no	more	talk	of	union trouble.	Johnny	was	a	little	shaken	by	the	killing.	It	was	the	first	time	the	long arm	of	the	Don	had	struck	such	a	lethal	blow	so	close	to	him.
																As	the	weeks	went	by	and	he	became	busier	and	busier	with	getting the	script	ready,	casting	the	movie	and	working	out	production	details,	Johnny Fontane	forgot	about	his	voice,	his	not	being	able	to	sing.	Yet	when	the Academy	Award	nominations	came	out	and	he	found	himself	one	of	the candidates,	he	was	depressed	because	he	was	not	asked	to	sing	one	of	the	songs nominated	for	the	Oscar	at	the	ceremony	that	would	be	televised	nationally.	But he	shrugged	it	off	and	kept	working.	He	had	no	hope	of	winning	the	Academy Award	now	that	his	Godfather	was	no	longer	able	to	put	pressure	on,	but	getting the	nomination	had	some	value.
																The	record	he	and	Nino	had	cut,	the	one	of	Italian	songs,	was	selling much	better	than	anything	he	had	cut	lately,	but	he	knew	that	it	was	Nino’s success	more	than	his.	He	resigned	himself	to	never	being	able	to	again	sing professionally.
																Once	a	week	he	had	dinner	with	Ginny	and	the	kids.	No	matter	how hectic	things	got	he	never	skipped	that	duty.	But	he	didn’t	sleep	with	Ginny. Meanwhile	his	second	wife	had	finagled	a	Mexican	divorce	and	so	he	was	a bachelor	again.	Oddly	enough	he	was	not	that	frantic	to	bang	starlets	who	would have	been	easy	meat.	He	was	too	snobbish	really.	He	was	hurt	that	none	of	the young	stars,	the	actresses	who	were	still	on	top,	ever	gave	him	a	tumble.	But	it was	good	to	work	hard.	Most	nights	he	would	go	home	alone,	put	his	old	records on	the	player,	have	a	drink	and	hum	along	with	them	for	a	few	bars.	He	had	been good,	damn	good.	He	hadn’t	realized	how	good	he	was.	Even	aside	from	the special	voice,	which	could	have	happened	to	anybody,	he	was	good.	He	had been	a	real	artist	and	never	knew	it,	and	never	knew	how	much	he	loved	it.	He’d ruined	his	voice	with	booze	and	tobacco	and	broads	just	when	he	really	knew what	it	was	all	about.
																Sometimes	Nino	came	over	for	a	drink	and	listened	with	him	and Johnny	would	say	to	him	scornfully,	“You	guinea	bastard,	you	never	sang	like
that	in	your	life.”	And	Nino	would	give	him	that	curiously	charming	smile	and shake	his	head	and	say,	“No,	and	I	never	will,”	in	a	sympathetic	voice,	as	if	he knew	what	Johnny	was	thinking.
																Finally,	a	week	before	shooting	the	new	picture,	the	Academy	Award night	rolled	around.	Johnny	invited	Nino	to	come	along	but	Nino	refused. Johnny	said,	“Buddy,	I	never	asked	you	a	favor,	right?	Do	me	a	favor	tonight and	come	with	me.	You’re	the	only	guy	who’ll	really	feel	sorry	for	me	if	I	don’t win.”
																For	one	moment	Nino	looked	startled.	Then	he	said,	“Sure,	old	buddy, I	can	make	it.”	He	paused	for	a	moment	and	said,	“If	you	don’t	win,	forget	it. Just	get	as	drunk	as	you	can	get	and	I’ll	take	care	of	you.	Hell,	I	won’t	even drink	myself	tonight.	How	about	that	for	being	a	buddy?”
																“Man,”	Johnny	Fontane	said,	“that’s	some	buddy.”
																The	Academy	Award	night	came	and	Nino	kept	his	promise.	He	came to	Johnny’s	house	dead	sober	and	they	left	for	the	presentation	theater	together. Nino	wondered	why	Johnny	hadn’t	invited	any	of	his	girls	or	his	ex-wives	to	the Award	dinner.	Especially	Ginny.	Didn’t	he	think	Ginny	would	root	for	him? Nino	wished	he	could	have	just	one	drink,	it	looked	like	a	long	bad	night.
																Nino	Valenti	found	the	whole	Academy	Award	affair	a	bore	until	the winner	of	the	best	male	actor	was	announced.	When	he	heard	the	words	“Johnny Fontane,”	he	found	himself	jumping	into	the	air	and	applauding.	Johnny	reached out	a	hand	for	him	to	shake	and	Nino	shook	it.	He	knew	his	buddy	needed human	contact	with	someone	he	trusted	and	Nino	felt	an	enormous	sadness	that Johnny	didn’t	have	anyone	better	than	himself	to	touch	in	his	moment	of	glory.
																What	followed	was	an	absolute	nightmare.	Jack	Woltz’s	picture	had swept	all	the	major	awards	and	so	the	studio’s	party	was	swamped	with newspaper	people	and	all	the	on-the-make	hustlers,	male	and	female.	Nino	kept his	promise	to	remain	sober,	and	he	tried	to	watch	over	Johnny.	But	the	women of	the	party	kept	pulling	Johnny	Fontane	into	bedrooms	for	a	little	chat	and Johnny	kept	getting	drunker	and	drunker.
																Meanwhile	the	woman	who	had	won	the	award	for	the	best	actress	was suffering	the	same	fate	but	loving	it	more	and	handling	it	better.	Nino	turned	her down,	the	only	man	at	the	party	to	do	so.
																Finally	somebody	had	a	great	idea.	The	public	mating	of	the	two winners,	everybody	else	at	the	party	to	be	spectators	in	the	stands.	The	actress was	stripped	down	and	the	other	women	started	to	undress	Johnny	Fontane.	It was	then	that	Nino,	the	only	sober	person	there,	grabbed	the	half-clothed	Johnny and	slung	him	over	his	shoulder	and	fought	his	way	out	of	the	house	and	to	their car.	As	he	drove	Johnny	home,	Nino	thought	that	if	that	was	success,	he	didn’t want	it.
	
Book	III
															
															
Chapter	14
	
																The	Don	was	a	real	man	at	the	age	of	twelve.	Short,	dark,	slender, living	in	the	strange	Moorish-looking	village	of	Corleone	in	Sicily,	he	had	been born	Vito	Andolini,	but	when	strange	men	came	to	kill	the	son	of	the	man	they had	murdered,	his	mother	sent	the	young	boy	to	America	to	stay	with	friends. And	in	the	new	land	he	changed	his	watc	to	Corleone	to	preserve	some	tie	with his	native	village.	It	was	one	of	the	few	gestures	of	sentiment	he	was	ever	to make.
																In	Sicily	at	the	turn	of	the	century	the	Mafia	was	the	second government,	far	more	powerful	than	the	official	one	in	Rome.	Vito	Corleone’s father	became	involved	in	a	feud	with	another	villager	who	took	his	case	to	the Mafia.	The	father	refused	to	knuckle	under	and	in	a	public	quarrel	killed	the local	Mafia	chief.	A	week	later	he	himself	was	found	dead,	his	body	torn	apart by	lupara	blasts.	A	month	after	the	funeral	Mafia	gunmen	came	inquiring	after the	young	boy,	Vito.	They	had	decided	that	he	was	too	close	to	manhood,	that	he might	try	to	avenge	the	death	of	his	father	in	the	years	to	come.	The	twelve-yearold	Vito	was	hidden	by	relatives	and	shipped	to	America.	There	he	was	boarded with	the	Abbandandos,	whose	son	Genco	was	later	to	become	Consigliere	to	his Don.
																Young	Vito	went	to	work	in	the	Abbandando	grocery	store	on	Ninth Avenue	in	New	York’s	Hell’s	Kitchen.	At	the	age	of	eighteen	Vito	married	an Italian	girl	freshly	arrived	from	Sicily,	a	girl	of	only	sixteen	but	a	skilled	cook,	a good	housewife.	They	settled	down	in	a	tenement	on	Tenth	Avenue,	near	35th Street,	only	a	few	blocks	from	where	Vito	worked,	and	two	years	later	were blessed	with	their	first	child,	Santino,	called	by	all	his	friends	Sonny	because	of his	devotion	to	his	father.
																In	the	neighborhood	lived	a	man	called	Fanucci.	He	was	a	heavy-set, fierce-looking	Italian	who	wore	expensive	light-colored	suits	and	a	creamcolored	fedora.	This	man	was	reputed	to	be	of	the	“Black	Hand,”	an	offshoot	of
the	Mafia	which	extorted	money	from	families	and	storekeepers	by	threat	of physical	violence.	However,	since	most	of	the	inhabitants	of	the	neighborhood were	violent	themselves,	Fanucci’s	threats	of	bodily	harm	were	effective	only with	elderly	couples	without	male	children	to	defend	them.	Some	of	the storekeepers	paid	him	trifling	sums	as	a	matter	of	convenience.	However, Fanucci	was	also	a	scavenger	on	fellow	criminals,	people	who	illegally	sold Italian	lottery	or	ran	gambling	games	in	their	homes.	The	Abbandando	grocery gave	him	a	small	tribute,	this	despite	the	protests	of	young	Genco,	who	told	his father	he	would	settle	the	Fanucci	hash.	His	father	forbade	him.	Vito	Corleone observed	all	this	without	feeling	in	any	way	involved.
																One	day	Fanucci	was	set	upon	by	three	young	men	who	cut	his	throat from	ear	to	ear,	not	deeply	enough	to	kill	him,	but	enough	to	frighten	him	and make	him	bleed	a	great	deal.	Vito	saw	Fanucci	fleeing	from	his	punishers,	the circular	slash	flowing	red.	What	he	never	forgot	was	Fanucci	holding	the	creamcolored	fedora	under	his	chin	to	catch	the	dripping	blood	as	he	ran.	As	if	he	did not	want	his	suit	soiled	or	did	not	want	to	leave	a	shameful	trail	of	carmine.
																But	this	attack	proved	a	blessing	in	disguise	for	Fanucci.	The	three young	men	were	not	murderers,	merely	tough	young	boys	determined	to	teach him	a	lesson	and	stop	him	from	scavenging.	Fanucci	proved	himself	a	murderer. A	few	weeks	later	the	knife-wielder	was	shot	to	death	and	the	families	of	the other	two	young	men	paid	an	indemnity	to	Fanucci	to	make	him	forswear	his vengeance.	After	that	the	tributes	became	higher	and	Fanucci	became	a	partner in	the	neighborhood	gambling	games.	As	for	Vito	Corleone,	it	was	none	of	his affair.	He	forgot	about	it	immediately.
																During	World	War	I,	when	imported	olive	oil	became	scarce,	Fanucci acquired	a	part-interest	in	the	Abbandando	grocery	store	by	supplying	it	not	only with	oil,	but	imported	Italian	salami,	hams	and	cheeses.	He	then	moved	a nephew	into	the	store	and	Vito	Corleone	found	himself	out	of	a	job.
																By	this	time,	the	second	child,	Frederico,	had	arrived	and	Vito Corleone	had	four	mouths	to	feed.	Up	to	this	time	he	had	been	a	quiet,	very contained	young	man	who	kept	his	thoughts	to	himself.	The	son	of	the	grocery store	owner,	young	Genco	Abbandando,	was	his	closest	friend,	and	to	the
surprise	of	both	of	them,	Vito	reproached	his	friend	for	his	father’s	deed.	Genco, flushed	with	shame,	vowed	to	Vito	that	he	would	not	have	to	worry	about	food. That	he,	Genco,	would	steal	food	from	the	grocery	to	supply	his	friend’s	needs. This	offer	though	was	sternly	refused	by	Vito	as	too	shameful,	a	son	stealing from	his	father.
																The	young	Vito,	however,	felt	a	cold	anger	for	the	dreaded	Fanucci. He	never	showed	this	anger	in	any	way	but	bided	his	time.	He	worked	in	the railroad	for	a	few	months	and	then,	when	the	war	ended,	work	became	slow	and he	could	earn	only	a	few	days’	pay	a	month.	Also,	most	of	the	foremen	were Irish	and	American	and	abused	the	workmen	in	the	foulest	language,	which	Vito always	bore	stone-faced	as	if	he	did	not	comprehend,	though	he	understood English	very	well	despite	his	accent.
																One	evening	as	Vito	was	having	supper	with	his	family	there	was	a knock	on	the	window	that	led	to	the	open	air	shaft	that	separated	them	from	the next	building.	When	Vito	pulled	aside	the	curtain	he	saw	to	his	astonishment	one of	the	young	men	in	the	neighborhood,	Peter	Clemenza,	leaning	out	from	a window	on	the	other	side	of	the	air	shaft.	He	was	extending	a	white-sheeted bundle.
																“Hey,	paisan,”	Clemenza	said.	“Hold	these	for	me	until	I	ask	for	them. Hurry	up.”	Automatically	Vito	reached	over	the	empty	space	of	the	air	shaft	and took	the	bundle.	Clemenza’s	face	was	strained	and	urgent.	He	was	in	some	sort of	trouble	and	Vito’s	helping	action	was	instinctive.	But	when	he	untied	the bundle	in	his	kitchen,	there	were	five	oily	guns	staining	the	white	cloth.	He	put them	in	his	bedroom	closet	and	waited.	He	learned	that	Clemenza	had	been taken	away	by	the	police.	They	must	have	been	knocking	on	his	door	when	he handed	the	guns	over	the	air	shaft.
																Vito	never	said	a	word	to	anyone	and	of	course	his	terrified	wife	dared not	open	her	lips	even	in	gossip	for	fear	her	own	husband	would	be	sent	to prison.	Two	days	later	Peter	Clemenza	reappeared	in	the	neighborhood	and asked	Vito	casually,	“Do	you	have	my	goods	still?”
																Vito	nodded.	He	was	in	the	habit	of	talking	little.	Clemenza	came	up