	Now	as	she	ran	up	the	steps	toward	Sonny	a	tremendous	flash	of	desire went	through	her	body.	On	the	landing	Sonny	grabbed	her	hand	and	pulled	her down	the	hall	into	an	empty	bedroom.	Her	legs	went	weak	as	the	door	closed behind	them.	She	felt	Sonny’s	mouth	on	hers,	his	lips	tasting	of	burnt	tobacco, bitter.	She	opened	her	mouth.	At	that	moment	she	felt	his	hand	come	up	beneath her	bridesmaid’s	gown,	heard	the	rustle	of	material	giving	way,	felt	his	large warm	hand	between	her	legs,	ripping	aside	the	satin	panties	to	caress	her	vulva. She	put	her	arms	around	his	neck	and	hung	there	as	he	opened	his	trousers.	Then he	placed	both	hands	beneath	her	bare	buttocks	and	lifted	her.	She	gave	a	little hop	in	the	air	so	that	both	her	legs	were	wrapped	around	his	upper	thighs.	His tongue	was	in	her	mouth	and	she	sucked	on	it.	He	gave	a	savage	thrust	that banged	her	head	against	the	door.	She	felt	something	bumming	pass	between	her thighs.	She	let	her	right	hand	drop	from	his	neck	and	reached	down	to	guide	him. Her	hand	closed	around	an	enormous,	blood-gorged	pole	of	muscle.	It	pulsated in	her	hand	like	an	animal	and	almost	weeping	with	grateful	ecstasy	she	pointed it	into	her	own	wet,	turgid	flesh.	The	thrust	of	its	entering,	the	unbelievable pleasure	made	her	gasp,	brought	her	legs	up	almost	around	his	neck,	and	then like	a	quiver,	her	body	received	the	savage	arrows	of	his	lightning-like	thrusts; innumerable,	torturing;	arching	her	pelvis	higher	and	higher	until	for	the	first time	in	her	life.	she	reached	a	shattering	climax,	felt	his	hardness	break	and	then the	crawly	flood	of	semen	over	her	thighs.	Slowly	her	legs	relaxed	from	around his	body,	slid	down	until	they	reached	the	floor.	They	leaned	against	each	other, out	of	breath.
																It	might	have	been	going	on	for	some	time	but	now	they	could	hear	the soft	knocking	on	the	door.	Sonny	quickly	buttoned	his	trousers,	meanwhile blocking	the	door	so	that	it	could	not	be	opened.	Lucy	frantically	smoothed down	her	pink	gown,	her	eyes	flickering,	but	the	thing	that	had	given	her	so much	pleasure	was	hidden	inside	sober	black	cloth.	Then	they	heard	Tom Hagen’s	voice,	very	low,	“Sonny,	you	in	there?”
																Sonny	sighed	with	relief.	He	winked	at	Lucy.	“Yeah,	Tom,	what	is	it?”
																Hagen’s	voice,	still	low,	said,	“The	Don	wants	you	in	his	office. Now.”	They	could	hear	his	footsteps	as	he	walked	away.	Sonny	waited	for	a	few moments,	gave	Lucy	a	hard	kiss	on	the	lips,	and	then	slipped	out	the	door	after
Hagen.
																Lucy	combed	her	hair.	She	checked	her	dress	and	pulled	around	her garter	straps.	Her	body	felt	bruised,	her	lips	pulpy	and	tender.	She	went	out	the door	and	though	she	felt	the	sticky	wetness	between	her	thighs	she	did	not	go	to the	bathroom	to	wash	but	ran	straight	on	down	the	steps	and	into	the	garden.	She took	her	seat	at	the	bridal	table	next	to	Connie,	who	exclaimed	petulantly, “Lucy,	where	were	you?	You	look	drunk.	Stay	beside	me	now.”
																The	blond	groom	poured	Lucy	a	glass	of	wine	and	smiled	knowingly. Lucy	didn’t	care.	She	lifted	the	grapey,	dark	red	juice	to	her	parched	mouth	and drank.	She	felt	the	sticky	wetness	between	her	thighs	and	pressed	her	legs together.	Her	body	was	trembling.	Over	the	glass	rim,	as	she	drank,	her	eyes searched	hungrily	to	find	Sonny	Corleone.	There	was	no	one	else	she	cared	to see.	Slyly	she	whispered	in	Connie’s	ear,	“Only	a	few	hours	more	and	you’ll know	what	it’s	all	about.”	Connie	giggled.	Lucy	demurely	folded	her	hands	on the	table,	treacherously	triumphant,	as	if	she	had	stolen	a	treasure	from	the	bride.
	
																Amerigo	Bonasera	followed	Hagen	into	the	corner	room	of	the	house and	found	Don	Corleone	sitting	behind	a	huge	desk.	Sonny	Corleone	was standing	by	the	window,	looking	out	into	the	garden.	For	the	first	time	that afternoon	the	Don	behaved	coolly.	He	did	not	embrace	the	visitor	or	shake hands.	The	sallow-faced	undertaker	owed	his	invitation	to	the	fact	that	his	wife and	the	wife	of	the	Don	were	the	closest	of	friends.	Amerigo	Bonasera	himself was	in	severe	disfavor	with	Don	Corleone.
																Bonasera	began	his	request	obliquely	and	cleverly.	“You	must	excuse my	daughter,	your	wife’s	goddaughter,	for	not	doing	your	family	the	respect	of coming	today.	She	is	in	the	hospital	still.”	He	glanced	at	Sonny	Corleone	and Tom	Hagen	to	indicate	that	he	did	not	wish	to	speak	before	them.	But	the	Don was	merciless.
																“We	all	know	of	your	daughter’s	misfortune,”	Don	Corleone	said.	“If	I can	help	her	in	any	way,	you	have	only	to	speak.	My	wife	is	her	godmother	after
all.	I	have	never	forgotten	that	honor.”	This	was	a	rebuke.	The	undertaker	never called	Don	Corleone	“Godfather”	as	custom	dictated.
																Bonasera,	ashen-faced,	asked,	directly	now,	“May	I	speak	to	you alone?”
																Don	Corleone	shook	his	head.	“I	trust	these	two	men	with	my	life. They	are	my	two	right	arms.	I	cannot	insult	them	by	sending	them	away.”
																The	undertaker	closed	his	eyes	for	a	moment	and	then	began	to	speak. His	voice	was	quiet,	the	voice	he	used	to	console	the	bereaved.	“I	raised	my daughter	in	the	American	fashion.	I	believe	in	America.	America	has	made	my fortune.	I	gave	my	daughter	her	freedom	and	yet	taught	her	never	to	dishonor	her family.	She	found	a	‘boy	friend,’	not	an	Italian.	She	went	to	the	movies	with him.	She	stayed	out	late.	But	he	never	came	to	meet	her	parents.	I	accepted	all this	without	a	protest,	the	fault	is	mine.	Two	months	ago	he	took	her	for	a	drive. He	had	a	masculine	friend	with	him.	They	made	her	drink	whiskey	and	then	they tried	to	take	advantage	of	her.	She	resisted.	She	kept	her	honor.	They	beat	her. Like	an	animal.	When	I	went	to	the	hospital	she	had	two	black	eyes.	Her	nose was	broken.	Her	jaw	was	shattered.	They	had	to	wire	it	together.	She	wept through	her	pain.	‘Father,	Father,	why	did	they	do	it?	Why	did	they	do	this	to me?’	And	I	wept.”	Bonasera	could	not	speak	further,	he	was	weeping	now though	his	voice	had	not	betrayed	his	emotion.
																Don	Corleone,	as	if	against	his	will,	made	a	gesture	of	sympathy	and Bonasera	went	on,	his	voice	human	with	suffering.	“Why	did	I	weep?	She	was the	light	of	my	life,	an	affectionate	daughter.	A	beautiful	girl.	She	trusted	people and	now	she	will	never	trust	them	again.	She	will	never	be	beautiful	again.”	He was	trembling,	his	sallow	face	flushed	an	ugly	dark	red.
																“I	went	to	the	police	like	a	good	American.	The	two	boys	were arrested.	They	were	brought	to	trial.	The	evidence	was	overwhelming	and	they pleaded	guilty.	The	judge	sentenced	them	to	three	years	in	prison	and	suspended the	sentence.	They	went	free	that	very	day.	I	stood	in	the	courtroom	like	a	fool and	those	bastards	smiled	at	me.	And	then	I	said	to	my	wife:	‘We	must	go	to Don	Corleone	for	justice.”‘
																The	Don	had	bowed	his	head	to	show	respect	for	the	man’s	grief.	But when	he	spoke,	the	words	were	cold	with	offended	dignity.	“Why	did	you	go	to the	police?	Why	didn’t	you	come	to	me	at	the	beginning	of	this	affair?”
																Bonasera	muttered	almost	inaudibly,	“What	do	you	want	of	me?	Tell me	what	you	wish.	But	do	what	I	beg	you	to	do.”	There	was	something	almost insolent	in	his	words.
																Don	Corleone	said	gravely,	“	And	what	is	that?”
																Bonasera	glanced	at	Hagen	and	Sonny	Corleone	and	shook	his	head. The	Don,	still	sitting	at	Hagen’s	desk,	inclined	his	body	toward	the	undertaker. Bonasera	hesitated,	then	bent	down	and	put	his	lips	so	close	to	the	Don’s	hairy ear	that	they	touched.	Don	Corleone	listened	like	a	priest	in	the	confessional, gazing	away	into	the	distance,	impassive,	remote.	They	stood	so	for	a	long moment	until	Bonasera	finished	whispering	and	straightened	to	his	full	height. The	Don	looked	up	gravely	at	Bonasera.	Bonasera,	his	face	flushed,	returned	the stare	unflinchingly.
																Finally	the	Don	spoke.	“That	I	cannot	do.	You	are	being	carried away.”
																Bonasera	said	loudly,	clearly,	“I	will	pay	you	anything	you	ask.”	On hearing	this,	Hagen	flinched,	a	nervous	flick	of	his	head.	Sonny	Corleone	folded his	arms,	smiled	sardonically	as	he	turned	from	the	window	to	watch	the	scene in	the	room	for	the	first	time.
																Don	Corleone	rose	from	behind	the	desk.	His	face	was	still	impassive but	his	voice	rang	like	cold	death.	“We	have	known	each	other	many	years,	you and	I,”	he	said	to	the	undertaker,	“but	until	this	day	you	never	came	to	me	for counselor	help.	I	can’t	remember	the	last	time	you	invited	me	to	your	house	for coffee	though	my	wife	is	godmother	to	your	only	child.	Let	us	be	frank.	You spurned	my	friendship.	You	feared	to	be	in	my	debt.”
																Bonasera	murmured,	“I	didn’t	want	to	get	into	trouble.”
																The	Don	held	up	his	hand.	“No.	Don’t	speak.	You	found	America	a paradise.	You	had	a	good	trade,	you	made	a	good	living,	you	thought	the	world	a harmless	place	where	you	could	take	your	pleasure	as	you	willed.	You	never armed	yourself	with	true	friends.	After	all,	the	police	guarded	you,	there	were courts	of	law,	you	and	yours	could	come	to	no	harm.	You	did	not	need	Don Corleone.	Very	well.	My	feelings	were	wounded	but	I	am	not	that	sort	of	person who	thrusts	his	friendship	on	those	who	do	not	value	it--0n	those	who	think	me of	little	account.”	The	Don	paused	and	gave	the	undertaker	a	polite,	ironic	smile. “Now	you	come	to	me	and	say,	‘Don	Corleone	give	me	justice.’	And	you	do	not ask	with	respect.	You	do	not	offer	me	your	friendship.	You	come	into	my	home on	the	bridal	day	of	my	daughter	and	you	ask	me	to	do	murder	and	you	say--” here	the	Don’s	voice	became	a	scornful	mimicry--”	‘I	will	pay	you	anything.’ No,	no,	I	am	not	offended,	but	what	have	I	ever	done	to	make	you	treat	me	so disrespectfully?”
																Bonasera	cried	out	in	his	anguish	and	his	fear,	“	America	has	been good	to	me.	I	wanted	to	be	a	good	citizen.	I	wanted	my	child	to	be	American.”
																The	Don	clapped	his	hands	together	with	decisive	approval.	“Well spoken.	Very	fine.	Then	you	have	nothing	to	complain	about.	The	judge	has ruled.	America	has	ruled.	Bring	your	daughter	flowers	and	a	box	of	candy	when you	go	visit	her	in	the	hospital.	That	will	comfort	her.	Be	content.	After	all,	this is	not	a	serious	affair,	the	boys	were	young,	high-spirited,	and	one	of	them	is	the son	of	a	powerful	politician.	No,	my	dear	Amerigo,	you	have	always	been honest.	I	must	admit,	though	you	spurned	my	friendship,	that	I	would	trust	the given	word	of	Amerigo	Bonasera	more	than	I	would	any	other	man’s.	So	give me	your	word	that	you	will	put	aside	this	madness.	It	is	not	American.	Forgive. Forget.	Life	is	full	of	misfortunes.”
																The	cruel	and	contemptuous	irony	with	which	all	this	was	said,	the controlled	anger	of	the	Don,	reduced	the	poor	undertaker	to	a	quivering	jelly	but he	spoke	up	bravely	again.	“I	ask	you	for	justice.”
																Don	Corleone	said	curtly,	“The	court	gave	you	justice.”
																Bonasera	shook	his	head	stubbornly.	“No.	They	gave	the	youths
justice.	They	did	not	give	me	justice.”
																The	Don	acknowledged	this	fine	distinction	with	an	approving	nod, then	asked,	“What	is	your	justice?”
																“An	eye	for	an	eye,”	Bonasera	said.
																“You	asked	for	more,”	the	Don	said.	“Your	daughter	is	alive.”
																Bonasera	said	reluctantly,	“Let	them	suffer	as	she	suffers.”	The	Don waited	for	him	to	speak	further.	Bonasera	screwed	up	the	last	of	his	courage	and said,	“How	much	shall	I	pay	you?”	It	was	a	despairing	wail.
																Don	Corleone	turned	his	back.	It	was	a	dismissal.	Bonasera	did	not budge.
																Finally,	sighing,	a	good-hearted	man	who	cannot	remain	angry	with	an erring	friend,	Don	Corleone	turned	back	to	the	undertaker,	who	was	now	as	pale as	one	of	his	corpses.	Don	Corleone	was	gentle,	patient.	“Why	do	you	fear	to give	your	first	allegiance	to	me?”	he	said.	“You	go	to	the	law	courts	and	wait	for months.	You	spend	money	on	lawyers	who	know	full	well	you	are	to	be	made	a fool	of.	You	accept	judgment	from	a	judge	who	sells	himself	like	the	worst whore	in	the	streets.	Years	gone	by,	when	you	needed	money,	you	went	to	the banks	and	paid	ruinous	interest,	waited	hat	in	hand	like	a	beggar	while	they sniffed	around,	poked	their	noses	up	your	very	asshole	to	make	sure	you	could pay	them	back.”	The	Don	paused,	his	voice	became	sterner.
																“But	if	you	had	come	to	me,	my	purse	would	have	been	yours.	If	you had	come	to	me	for	justice	those	scum	who	ruined	your	daughter	would	be weeping	bitter	tears	this	day.	If	by	some	misfortune	an	honest	man	like	yourself made	enemies	they	would	become	my	enemies”--the	Don	raised	his	arm,	finger pointing	at	Bonasera--”and	then,	believe	me,	they	would	fear	you.”
																Bonasera	bowed	his	head	and	murmured	in	a	strangled	voice,	“Be	my friend.	I	accept.”
																Don	Corleone	put	his	hand	on	the	man’s	shoulder...Good,”	he	said, “you	shall	have	your	justice.	Some	day,	and	that	day	may	never	come,	I	will	call upon	you	to	do	me	a	service	in	return.	Until	that	day,	consider	this	justice	a	gift from	my	wife,	your	daughter’s	godmother.”
																When	the	door	closed	behind	the	grateful	undertaker,	Don	Corleone turned	to	Hagen	and	said,	“Give	this	affair	to	Clemenza	and	tell	him	to	be	sure	to use	reliable	people,	people	who	will	not	be	carried	away	by	the	smell	of	blood. After	all,	we’re	not	murderers,	no	matter	what	that	corpse	valet	dreams	up	in	his foolish	head.”	He	noted	that	his	firstborn,	masculine	son	was	gazing	through	the window	at	the	garden	party.	It	was	hopeless,	Don	Corleone	thought.	If	he refused	to	be	instructed,	Santino	could	never	run	the	family	business,	could never	become	a	Don.	He	would	have	to	find	somebody	else.	And	soon.	After	all, he	was	not	immortal.
																From	the	garden,	startling	all	three	men,	there	came	a	happy	roaring shout.	Sonny	Corleone	pressed	close	to	the	window.	What	he	saw	made	him move	quickly	toward	the	door,	a	delighted	smile	on	his	face.	“It’s	Johnny,	he came	to	the	wedding,	what	did	I	tell	you?”	Hagen	moved	to	the	window.	“It’s really	your	godson,”	he	said	to	Don	Corleone.	“Shall	I	bring	him	here?”
																“No,”	the	Don	said.	“Let	the	people	enjoy	him.	Let	him	come	to	me when	he	is	ready.”	He	smiled	at	Hagen.	“You	see?	He	is	a	good	godson.”
																Hagen	felt	a	twinge	of	jealousy.	He	said	dryly,	“It’s	been	two	years. He’s	probably	in	trouble	again	and	wants	you	to	help.”
																“And	who	should	he	come	to	if	not	his	godfather?”	asked	Don Corleone.
	
																The	first	one	to	see	Johnny	Fontane	enter	the	garden	was	Connie Corleone.	She	forgot	her	bridal	dignity	and	screamed,	“Johneee.”	Then	she	ran into	his	arms.	He	hugged	her	tight	and	kissed	her	on	the	mouth,	kept	his	arm around	her	as	others	came	up	to	greet	him.	They	were	all	his	old	friends,	people
he	had	grown	up	with	on	the	West	Side.	Then	Connie	was	dragging	him	to	her new	husband.	Johnny	saw	with	amusement	that	the	blond	young	man	looked	a little	sour	at	no	longer	being	the	star	of	the	day.	He	turned	on	all	his	charm, shaking	the	groom’s	hand,	toasting	him	with	a	glass	of	wine.
																A	familiar	voice	called	from	the	bandstand,	“How	about	giving	us	a song,	Johnny?”	He	looked	up	and	saw	Nino	Valenti	smiling	down	at	him. Johnny	Fontane	jumped	up	on	the	bandstand	and	threw	his	arms	around	Nino. They	had	been	inseparable,	singing	together,	going	out	with	girls	together,	until Johnny	had	started	to	become	famous	and	sing	on	the	radio.	When	he	had	gone to	Hollywood	to	make	movies	Johnny	had	phoned	Nino	a	couple	of	times	just	to talk	and	had	promised	to	get	him	a	club	singing	date.	But	he	had	never	done	so. Seeing	Nino	now,	his	cheerful,	mocking,	drunken	grin,	all	the	affection	returned.
																Nino	began	strumming	on	the	mandolin.	Johnny	Fontane	put	his	hand on	Nino’s	shoulder.	“This	is	for	the	bride,”	he	said,	and	stamping	his	foot, chanted	the	words	to	an	obscene	Sicilian	love	song.	As	he	sang,	Nino	made suggestive	motions	with	his	body.	The	bride	blushed	proudly,	the	throng	of guests	roared	its	approval.	Before	the	song	ended	they	were	all	stamping	with their	feet	and	roaring	out	the	sly,	double-meaning	tag	line	that	finished	each stanza.	At	the	end	they	would	not	stop	applauding	until	Johnny	cleared	his	throat to	sing	another	song.
																They	were	all	proud	of	him.	He	was	of	them	and	he	had	become	a famous	singer,	a	movie	star	who	slept	with	the	most	desired	women	in	the	world. And	yet	he	had	shown	proper	respect	for	his	Godfather	by	traveling	three thousand	miles	to	attend	this	wedding.	He	still	loved	old	friends	like	Nino Valenti.	Many	of	the	people	there	had	seen	Johnny	and	Nino	singing	together when	they	were	just	boys,	when	no	one	dreamed	that	Johnny	Fontane	would grow	up	to	hold	the	hearts	of	fifty	million	women	in	his	hands.
																Johnny	Fontane	reached	down	and	lifted	the	bride	up	onto	the bandstand	so	that	Connie	stood	between	him	and	Nino.	Both	men	crouched down,	facing	each	other,	Nino	plucking	the	mandolin	for	a	few	harsh	chords.	It was	an	old	routine	of	theirs,	a	mock	battle	and	wooing,	using	their	voices	like swords,	each	shouting	a	chorus	in	turn.	With	the	most	delicate	courtesy,	Johnny
let	Nino’s	voice	overwhelm	his	own,	let	Nino	take	the	bride	from	his	arm,	let Nino	swing	into	the	last	victorious	stanza	while	his	own	voice	died	away.	The whole	wedding	party	broke	into	shouts	of	applause,	the	three	of	them	embraced each	other	at	the	end.	The	guests	begged	for	another	song.
																Only	Don	Corleone,	standing	in	the	comer	entrance	of	the	house, sensed	something	amiss.	Cheerily,	with	bluff	good	humor,	careful	not	to	give offense	to	his	guests,	he	called	out,	“My	godson	has	come	three	thousand	miles to	do	us	honor	and	no	one	thinks	to	wet	his	throat?”	At	once	a	dozen	full wineglasses	were	thrust	at	Johnny	Fontane.	He	took	a	sip	from	all	and	rushed	to embrace	his	Godfather.	As	he	did	so	he	whispered	something	into	the	older man’s	ear.	Don	Corleone	led	him	into	the	house.
																Tom	Hagen	held	out	his	hand	when	Johnny	came	into	the	room. Johnny	shook	it	and	said,	“How	are	you,	Tom?”	But	without	his	usual	charm that	consisted	of	a	genuine	warmth	for	people.	Hagen	was	a	little	hurt	by	this coolness	but	shrugged	it	off.	It	was	one	of	the	penalties	for	being	the	Don’s hatchet	man.
																Johnny	Fontane	said	to	the	Don,	“When	I	got	the	wedding	invitation	I said	to	myself,	‘My	Godfather	isn’t	mad	at	me	anymore.’	I	called	you	five	times after	my	divorce	and	Tom	always	told	me	you	were	out	or	busy	so	I	knew	you were	sore.”
																Don	Corleone	was	filling	glasses	from	the	yellow	bottle	of	Strega. “That’s	all	forgotten.	Now.	Can	I	do	something	for	you	still?	You’re	not	too famous,	too	rich,	that	I	can’t	help	you?”
																Johnny	gulped	down	the	yellow	fiery	liquid	and	held	out	his	glass	to be	refilled.	He	tried	to	sound	jaunty.	“I’m	not	rich,	Godfather.	I’m	going	down. You	were	right.	I	should	never	have	left	my	wife	and	kids	for	that	tramp	I married.	I	don’t	blame	you	for	getting	sore	at	me.”
																The	Don	shrugged.	“I	worried	about	you,	you’re	my	godson,	that’s all.”
																Johnny	paced	up	and	down	the	room.	“I	was	crazy	about	that	bitch. The	biggest	star	in	Hollywood.	She	looks	like	an	angel.	And	you	know	what	she does	after	a	picture?	If	the	makeup	man	does	a	good	job	on	her	face,	she	lets	him bang	her.	If	the	cameraman	made	her	look	extra	good,	she	brings	him	into	her dressing	room	and	gives	him	a	screw.	Anybody.	She	uses	her	body	like	I	use	the loose	change	in	my	pocket	for	a	tip.	A	whore	made	for	the	devil.”
																Don	Corleone	curtly	broke	in.	“How	is	your	family?”
																Johnny	sighed.	“I	took	care	of	them.	After	the	divorce	I	gave	Ginny and	the	kids	more	than	the	courts	said	I	should.	I	go	see	them	once	a	week.	I miss	them.	Sometimes	I	think	I’m	going	crazy.”	He	took	another	drink.	“Now my	second	wife	laughs	at	me.	She	can’t	understand	my	being	jealous.	She	calls me	an	old-fashioned	guinea,	she	makes	fun	of	my	singing.	Before	I	left	I	gave her	a	nice	beating	but	not	in	the	face	because	she	was	making	a	picture.	I	gave her	cramps,	I	punched	her	on	the	arms	and	legs	like	a	kid	and	she	kept	laughing at	me.”	He	lit	a	cigarette.	“So,	Godfather,	right	now,	life	doesn’t	seem	worth living.”
																Don	Corleone	said	simply.	“These	are	troubles	I	can’t	help	you	with.” He	paused,	then	asked,	“What’s	the	matter	with	your	voice?”
																All	the	assured	charm,	the	self-mockery,	disappeared	from	Johnny Fontane’s	face.	He	said	almost	brokenly,	“Godfather,	I	can’t	sing	anymore, something	happened	to	my	throat,	the	doctors	don’t	know	what.”	Hagen	and	the Don	looked	at	him	with	surprise,	Johnny	had	always	been	so	tough.	Fontane went	on.	“My	two	pictures	made	a	lot	of	money.	I	was	a	big	star.	Now	they throw	me	out.	The	head	of	the	studio	always	hated	my	guts	and	now	he’s	paying me	off.”
																Don	Corleone	stood	before	his	godson	and	asked	grimly,	“Why doesn’t	this	man	like	you?”
																“I	used	to	sing	those	songs	for	the	liberal	organizations,	you	know,	all that	stuff	you	never	liked	me	to	do.	Well,	Jack	Woltz	didn’t	like	it	either.	He called	me	a	Communist,	but	he	couldn’t	make	it	stick.	Then	I	snatched	a	girl	he