to	his	tenement	flat	and	was	given	a	glass	of	wine	while	Vito	dug	the	bundle	out of	his	bedroom	closet.
																Clemenza	drank	his	wine,	his	heavy	good-natured	face	alertly watching	Vito.	“Did	you	look	inside?”
																Vito,	his	face	impassive,	shook	his	head.	“I’m	not	interested	in	things that	don’t	concern	me,”	he	said.
																They	drank	wine	together	the	rest	of	the	evening.	They	found	each other	congenial.	Clemenza	was	a	storyteller;	Vito	Corleone	was	a	listener	to storytellers.	They	became	casual	friends.
																A	few	days	later	Clemenza	asked	the	wife	of	Vito	Corleone	if	she would	like	a	fine	rug	for	her	living	room	floor.	He	took	Vito	with	him	to	help carry	the	rug.
																Clemenza	led	Vito	to	an	apartment	house	with	two	marble	pillars	and	a white	marble	stoop.	He	used	a	key	to	open	the	door	and	they	were	inside	a	plush apartment.	Clemenza	grunted,	“Go	on	the	other	side	of	the	room	and	help	me roll	it	up.”
																The	rug	was	a	rich	red	wool.	Vito	Corleone	was	astonished	by Clemenza’s	generosity.	Together	they	rolled	the	rug	into	a	pile	and	Clemenza took	one	end	while	Vito	took	the	other.	They	lifted	it	and	started	carrying	it toward	the	door.
																At	that	moment	the	apartment	bell	rang.	Clemenza	immediately dropped	the	rug	and	strode	to	the	window.	He	pulled	the	drape	aside	slightly	and what	he	saw	made	him	draw	a	gun	from	inside	his	jacket.	It	was	only	at	that moment	the	astonished	Vito	Corleone	realized	that	they	were	stealing	the	rug from	some	stranger’s	apartment.
																The	apartment	bell	rang	again.	Vito	went	up	alongside	Clemenza	so that	he	too	could	see	what	was	happening.	At	the	door	was	a	uniformed policeman.	As	they	watched,	the	policeman	gave	the	doorbell	a	final	push,	then
shrugged	and	walked	away	down	the	marble	steps	and	down	the	street.
																Clemenza	grunted	in	a	satisfied	way	and	said,	“Come	on,	let’s	go.”	He picked	up	his	end	of	the	rug	and	Vito	picked	up	the	other	end.	The	policeman had	barely	turned	the	corner	before	they	were	edging	out	the	heavy	oaken	door and	into	the	street	with	the	rug	between	them.	Thirty	minutes	later	they	were cutting	the	rug	to	fit	the	living	room	of	Vito	Corleone’s	apartment.	They	had enough	left	over	for	the	bedroom.	Clemenza	was	an	expert	workman	and	from the	pockets	of	his	wide,	ill-fitting	jacket	(even	then	he	liked	to	wear	loose clothes	though	he	was	not	so	fat),	he	had	the	necessary	carpet-cutting	tools.
																Time	went	on,	things	did	not	improve.	The	Corleone	family	could	not eat	the	beautiful	rug.	Very	well,	there	was	no	work,	his	wife	and	children	must starve.	Vito	took	some	parcels	of	food	from	his	friend	Genco	while	he	thought things	out.	Finally	he	was	approached	by	Clemenza	and	Tessio,	another	young tough	of	the	neighborhood.	They	were	men	who	thought	well	of	him,	the	way	he carried	himself,	and	they	knew	he	was	desperate.	They	proposed	to	him	that	he become	one	of	their	gang	which	specialized	in	hijacking	trucks	of	silk	dresses after	those	trucks	were	loaded	up	at	the	factory	on	31st	Street.	There	was	no	risk. The	truck	drivers	were	sensible	workingmen	who	at	the	sight	of	a	gun	flopped on	the	sidewalk	like	angels	while	the	hijackers	drove	the	truck	away	to	be unloaded	at	a	friend’s	warehouse.	Some	of	the	merchandise	would	be	sold	to	an Italian	wholesaler,	part	of	the	loot	would	be	sold	door-to-door	in	the	Italian neighborhoods--Arthur	Avenue	in	the	Bronx,	Mulberry	Street,	and	the	Chelsea district	in	Manhattan--all	to	poor	Italian	families	looking	for	a	bargain,	whose daughters	could	never	be	able	to	afford	such	fine	apparel.	Clemenza	and	Tessio needed	Vito	to	drive	since	they	knew	he	chauffeured	the	Abbandando	grocery store	delivery	truck.	In	1919,	skilled	automobile	drivers	were	at	a	premium.
																Against	his	better	judgment,	Vito	Corleone	accepted	their	offer.	The clinching	argument	was	that	he	would	clear	at	least	a	thousand	dollars	for	his share	of	the	job.	But	his	young	companions	struck	him	as	rash,	the	planning	of the	job	haphazard,	the	distribution	of	the	loot	foolhardy.	Their	whole	approach was	too	careless	‘for	his	taste.	But	he	thought	them	of	good,	sound	character. Peter	Clemenza,	already	burly,	inspired	a	certain	trust,	and	the	lean	saturnine Tessio	inspired	confidence.
																The	job	itself	went	off	without	a	hitch.	Vito	Corleone	felt	no	fear, much	to	his	astonishment,	when	his	two	comrades	flashed	guns	and	made	the driver	get	out	of	the	silk	truck.	He	was	also	impressed	with	the	coolness	of Clemenza	and	Tessio.	They	didn’t	get	excited	but	joked	with	the	driver,	told	him if	he	was	a	good	lad	they’d	send	his	wife	a	few	dresses.	Because	Vito	thought	it stupid	to	peddle	dresses	himself	and	so	gave	his	whole	share	of	stock	to	the fence,	he	made	only	seven	hundred	dollars.	But	this	was	a	considerable	sum	of money	in	1919.
																The	next	day	on	the	street,	Vito	Corleone	was	stopped	by	the	creamsuited,	white-fedoraed	Fanucci.	Fanucci	was	a	brutal-looking	man	and	he	had done	nothing	to	disguise	the	circular	scar	that	stretched	in	a	white	semicircle from	ear	to	ear,	looping	under	his	chin.	He	had	heavy	black	brows	and	coarse features	which,	when	he	smiled,	were	in	some	odd	way	amiable.
																He	spoke	with	a	very	thick	Sicilian	accent.	“Ah,	young	fellow,”	he said	to	Vito.	“People	tell	me	you’re	rich.	You	and	your	two	friends.	But	don’t you	think	you’ve	treated	me	a	little	shabbily?	After	all,	this	is	my	neighborhood and	you	should	let	me	wet	my	beak.”	He	used	the	Sicilian	phrase	of	the	Mafia, “Fari	vagnari	a	pizzu.”	Pizzu	means	the	beak	of	any	small	bird	such	as	a	canary. The	phrase	itself	was	a	demand	for	part	of	the	loot.
																As	was	his	habit,	Vito	Corleone	did	not	answer.	He	understood	the implication	immediately	and	was	waiting	for	a	definite	demand.
																Fanucci	smiled	at	him,	showing	gold	teeth	and	stretching	his	nooselike	scar	tight	around	his	face.	He	mopped	his	face	with	a	handkerchief	and unbuttoned	his	jacket	for	a	moment	as	if	to	cool	himself	but	really	to	show	the gun	he	carried	stuck	in	the	waistband	of	his	comfortably	wide	trousers.	Then	he sighed	and	said,	“Give	me	five	hundred	dollars	and	I’ll	forget	the	insult.	After all,	young	people	don’t	know	the	courtesies	due	a	man	like	myself.”
																Vito	Corleone	smiled	at	him	and	even	as	a	young	man	still	unblooded, there	was	something	so	chilling	in	his	smile	that	Fanucci	hesitated	a	moment before	going	on.	“Otherwise	the	police	will	come	to	see	you,	your	wife	and children	will	be	shamed	and	destitute.	Of	course	if	my	information	as	to	your
gains	is	incorrect	I’ll	dip	my	beak	just	a	little.	But	no	less	than	three	hundred dollars.	And	don’t	try	to	deceive	me.”
																For	the	first	time	Vito	Corleone	spoke.	His	voice	was	reasonable, showed	no	anger.	It	was	courteous,	as	befitted	a	young	man	speaking	to	an	older man	of	Fanucci’s	eminence.	He	said	softly,	“My	two	friends	have	my	share	of the	money,	I’ll	have	to	speak	to	them.”
																Fanucci	was	reassured.	“You	can	tell	your	two	friends	that	I	expect them	to	let	me	wet	my	beak	in	the	same	manner.	Don’t	be	afraid	to	tell	them,”	he added	reassuringly.	“Clemenza	and	I	know	each	other	well,	he	understands	these things.	Let	yourself	be	guided	by	him.	He	has	more	experience	in	these	matters.”
																Vito	Corleone	shrugged.	He	tried	to	look	a	little	embarrassed.	“Of course,”	he	said.	“You	understand	this	is	all	new	to	me.	Thank	you	for	speaking to	me	as	a	godfather.”
																Fanucci	was	impressed.	“You’re	a	good	fellow,”	he	said.	He	took Vito’s	hand	and	clasped	it	in	both	of	his	hairy	ones.	“You	have	respect,”	he	said. “A	fine	thing	in	the	young.	Next	time	speak	to	me	first,	eh?	Perhaps	I	can	help you	in	your	plans.”
																In	later	years	Vito	Corleone	understood	that	what	had	made	him	act	in such	a	perfect,	tactical	way	with	Fanucci	was	the	death	of	his	own	hot-tempered father	who	had	been	killed	by	the	Mafia	in	Sicily.	But	at	that	time	all	he	felt	was an	icy	rage	that	this	man	planned	to	rob	him	of	the	money	he	had	risked	his	life and	freedom	to	earn.	He	had	not	been	afraid.	Indeed	he	thought,	at	that	moment, that	Fanucci	was	a	crazy	fool.	From	what	he	had	seen	of	Clemenza,	that	burly Sicilian	would	sooner	give	up	his	life	than	a	penny	of	his	loot.	After	all, Clemenza	had	been	ready	to	kill	a	policeman	merely	to	steal	a	rug.	And	the slender	Tessio	had	the	deadly	air	of	a	viper.
																But	later	that	night,	in	Clemenza’s	tenement	apartment	across	the	air shaft,	Vito	Corleone	received	another	lesson	in	the	education	he	had	just	begun. Clemenza	cursed,	Tessio	scowled,	but	then	both	men	started	talking	about whether	Fanucci	would	be	satisfied	with	two	hundred	dollars.	Tessio	thought	he
might.
																Clemenza	was	positive.	“No,	that	scarface	bastard	must	have	found	out what	we	made	from	the	wholesaler	who	bought	the	dresses.	Fanucci	won’t	take	a dime	less	than	three	hundred	dollars.	We’ll	have	to	pay.”
																Vito	was	astonished	but	was	careful	not	to	show	his	astonishment. “Why	do	we	have	to	pay	him?	What	can	he	do	to	the	three	of	us?	We’re	stronger than	him.	We	have	guns.	Why	do	we	have	to	hand	over	the	money	we	earned?”
																Clemenza	explained	patiently.	“Fanucci	has	friends,	real	brutes.	He has	connections	with	the	police.	He’d	like	us	to	tell	him	our	plans	because	he could	set	us	up	for	the	cops	and	earn	their	gratitude.	Then	they	would	owe	him	a favor.	That’s	how	he	operates.	And	he	has	a	license	from	Maranzalla	himself	to work	this	neighborhood.”	Maranzalla	was	a	gangster	often	in	the	newspapers, reputed	to	be	the	leader	of	a	criminal	ring	specializing	in	extortion,	gambling	and armed	robbery.
																Clemenza	served	wine	that	he	had	made	himself.	His	wife,	after putting	a	plate	of	salami,	olives	and	a	loaf	of	Italian	bread	on	the	table,	went down	to	sit	with	her	women	cronies	in	front	of	the	building,	carrying	her	chair with	her.	She	was	a	young	Italian	girl	only	a	few	years	in	the	country	and	did	not yet	understand	English.
																Vito	Corleone	sat	with	his	two	friends	and	drank	wine.	He	had	never used	his	intelligence	before	as	he	was	using	it	now.	He	was	surprised	at	how clearly	he	could	think.	He	recalled	everything	he	knew	about	Fanucci.	He remembered	the	day	the	man	had	had	his	throat	cut	and	had	run	down	the	street holding	his	fedora	under	his	chin	to	catch	the	dripping	blood.	He	remembered the	murder	of	the	man	who	had	wielded	the	knife	and	the	other	two	having	their sentences	removed	by	paying	an	indemnity.	And	suddenly	he	was	sure	that Fanucci	had	no	great	connections,	could	not	possibly	have.	Not	a	man	who informed	to	the	police.	Not	a	man	who	allowed	his	vengeance	to	be	bought	off. A	real	Mafioso	chief	would	have	had	the	other	two	men	killed	also.	No.	Fanucci had	got	lucky	and	killed	one	man	but	had	known	he	could	not	kill	the	other	two after	they	were	alerted.	And	so	he	had	allowed	himself	to	be	paid.	It	was	the
personal	brutal	force	of	the	man	that	allowed	him	to	levy	tribute	on	the shopkeepers,	the	gambling	games	that	ran	in	the	tenement	apartments.	But	Vito Corleone	knew	of	at	least	one	gambling	game	that	had	never	paid	Fanucci tributes	and	nothing	had	ever	happened	to	the	man	running	it.
																And	so	it	was	Fanucci	alone.	Or	Fanucci	with	some	gunmen	hired	for special	jobs	on	a	strictly	cash	basis.	Which	left	Vito	Corleone	with	another decision.	The	course	his	own	life	must	take.
																It	was	from	this	experience	came	his	oft-repeated	belief	that	every	man has	but	one	destiny.	On	that	night	he	could	have	paid	Fanucci	the	tribute	and have	become	again	a	grocery	clerk	with	perhaps	his	own	grocery	store	in	the years	to	come.	But	destiny	had	decided	that	he	was	to	become	a	Don	and	had brought	Fanucci	to	him	to	set	him	on	his	destined	path.
																When	they	finished	the	bottle	of	wine,	Vito	said	cautiously	to Clemenza	and	Tessio,	“If	you	like,	why	not	give	me	two	hundred	dollars	each	to pay	to	Fanucci?	I	guarantee	he	will	accept	that	amount	from	me.	Then	leave everything	in	my	hands.	I’ll	settle	this	problem	to	your	satisfaction.”
																At	once	Clemenza’s	eyes	gleamed	with	suspicion.	Vito	said	to	him coldly,	“I	never	lie	to	people	I	have	accepted	as	my	friends.	Speak	to	Fanucci yourself	tomorrow.	Let	him	ask	you	for	the	money.	But	don’t	pay	him.	And don’t	in	any	way	quarrel	with	him.	Tell	him	you	have	to	get	the	money	and	will give	it	to	me	to	give	him.	Let	him	understand	that	you	are	willing	to	pay	what	he asks.	Don’t	bargain.	I’ll	quarrel	over	the	price	with	him.	There’s	no	point making	him	angry	with	us	if	he’s	as	dangerous	a	man	as	you	say	he	is.”
																They	left	it	at	that.	The	next	day	Clemenza	spoke	with	Fanucci	to make	sure	that	Vito	was	not	making	up	the	story.	Then	Clemenza	came	to	Vito’s apartment	and	gave	him	the	two	hundred	dollars.	He	peered	at	Vito	Corleone and	said,	“Fanucci	told	me	nothing	below	three	hundred	dollars,	how	will	you make	him	take	less?”
																Vito	Corleone	said	reasonably,	“Surely	that’s	no	concern	of	yours.	Just remember	that	I’ve	done	you	a	service.”
																Tessio	came	later.	Tessio	was	more	reserved	than	Clemenza,	sharper, more	clever	but	with	less	force.	He	sensed	something	amiss,	something	not	quite right.	He	was	a	little	worried.	He	said	to	Vito	Corleone,	“Watch	yourself	with that	bastard	of	a	Black	Hand,	he’s	tricky	as	a	priest.	Do	you	want	me	to	be	here when	you	hand	him	the	money,	as	a	witness?”
																Vito	Corleone	shook	his	head.	He	didn’t	even	bother	to	answer.	He merely	said	to	Tessio,	“Tell	Fanucci	I’ll	pay	him	the	money	here	in	my	house	at nine	o’clock	tonight.	I’ll	have	to	give	him	a	glass	of	wine	and	talk,	reason	with him	to	take	the	lesser	sum.”
																Tessio	shook	his	head.	“You	won’t	have	much	luck.	Fanucci	never retreats.”
																“I’ll	reason	with	him,”	Vito	Corleone	said.	It	was	to	become	a	famous phrase	in	the	years	to	come.	It	was	to	become	the	warning	rattle	before	a	deadly strike.	When	he	became	a	Don	and	asked	opponents	to	sit	down	and	reason	with him,	they	understood	it	was	the	last	chance	to	resolve	an	affair	without bloodshed	and	murder.
																Vito	Corleone	told	his	wife	to	take	the	two	children,	Sonny	and	Fredo, down	into	the	street	after	supper	and	on	no	account	to	let	them	come	up	to	the house	until	he	gave	her	permission.	She	was	to	sit	on	guard	at	the	tenement	door. He	had	some	private	business	with	Fanucci	that	could	not	be	interrupted.	He	saw the	look	of	fear	on	her	face	and	was	angry.	He	said	to	her	quietly,	“Do	you	think you’ve	married	a	fool?”	She	didn’t	answer.	She	did	not	answer	because	she	was frightened,	not	of	Fanucci	now,	but	of	her	husband.	He	was	changing	visibly before	her	eyes,	hour	by	hour,	into	a	man	who	radiated	some	dangerous	force. He	had	always	been	quiet,	speaking	little,	but	always	gentle,	always	reasonable, which	was	extraordinary	in	a	young	Sicilian	male.	What	she	was	seeing	was	the shedding	of	his	protective	coloration	of	a	harmless	nobody	now	that	he	was ready	to	start	on	his	destiny.	He	had	started	late,	he	was	twenty-five	years	old, but	he	was	to	start	with	a	flourish.
																Vito	Corleone	had	decided	to	murder	Fanucci.	By	doing	so	he	would have	an	extra	seven	hundred	dollars	in	his	bankroll.	The	three	hundred	dollars	he
himself	would	have	to	pay	the	Black	Hand	terrorist	and	the	two	hundred	dollars from	Tessio	and	the	two	hundred	dollars	from	Clemenza.	If	he	did	not	kill Fanucci,	he	would	have	to	pay	the	man	seven	hundred	dollars	cold	cash.	Fanucci alive	was	not	worth	seven	hundred	dollars	to	him.	He	would	not	pay	seven hundred	dollars	to	keep	Fanucci	alive.	If	Fanucci	needed	seven	hundred	dollars for	an	operation	to	save	his	life,	he	would	not	give	Fanucci	seven	hundred dollars	for	the	surgeon.	He	owed	Fanucci	no	personal	debt	of	gratitude,	they were	not	blood	relatives,	he	did	not	love	Fanucci.	Why,	then,	should	he	give Fanucci	seven	hundred	dollars?
																And	it	followed	inevitably,	that	since	Fanucci	wished	to	take	seven hundred	dollars	from	him	by	force,	why	should	he	not	kill	Fanucci?	Surely	the world	could	do	without	such	a	person.
																There	were	of	course	some	practical	reasons.	Fanucci	might	indeed have	powerful	friends	who	would	seek	vengeance.	Fanucci	himself	was	a dangerous	man,	not	so	easily	killed.	There	were	the	police	and	the	electric	chair. But	Vito	Corleone	had	lived	under	a	sentence	of	death	since	the	murder	of	his father.	As	a	boy	of	twelve	he	had	fled	his	executioners	and	crossed	the	ocean into	a	strange	land,	taking	a	strange	name.	And	years	of	quiet	observation	had convinced	him	that	he	had	more	intelligence	and	more	courage	than	other	men, though	he	had	never	had	the	opportunity	to	use	that	intelligence	and	courage.
																And	yet	he	hesitated	before	taking	the	first	step	toward	his	destiny.	He even	packed	the	seven	hundred	dollars	in	a	single	fold	of	bills	and	put	the	money in	a	convenient	side	pocket	of	his	trousers.	But	he	put	the	money	in	the	left	side of	his	trousers.	In	the	right-hand	pocket	he	put	the	gun	Clemenza	had	given	him to	use	in	the	hijacking	of	the	silk	truck.
																Fanucci	came	promptly	at	nine	in	the	evening.	Vito	Corleone	set	out	a jug	of	homemade	wine	that	Clemenza	had	given	him.
																Fanucci	put	his	white	fedora	on	the	table	beside	the	jug	of	wine.	He loosened	his	broad	multiflowered	tie,	its	tomato	stains	camouflaged	by	the	bright patterns.	The	summer	night	was	hot,	the	gaslight	feeble.	It	was	very	quiet	in	the apartment.	But	Vito	Corleone	was	icy.	To	show	his	good	faith	he	handed	over
the	roll	of	bills	and	watched	carefully	as	Fanucci,	after	counting	it,	took	out	a wide	leather	wallet	and	stuffed	the	money	inside.	Fanucci	sipped	his	glass	of wine	and	said,	“You	still	owe	me	two	hundred	dollars.”	His	heavy-browed	face was	expressionless.
																Vito	Corleone	said	in	his	cool	reasonable	voice,	“I’m	a	little	short,	I’ve been	out	of	work.	Let	me	owe	you	the	money	for	a	few	weeks.”
																This	was	a	permissible	gambit.	Fanucci	had	the	bulk	of	the	money	and would	wait.	He	might	even	be	persuaded	to	take	nothing	more	or	to	wait	a	little longer.	He	chuckled	over	his	wine	and	said,	“Ah,	you’re	a	sharp	young	fellow. How	is	it	I’ve	never	noticed	you	before?	You’re	too	quiet	a	chap	for	your	own interest.	I	could	find	some	work	for	you	to	do	that	would	be	very	profitable.”
																Vito	Corleone	showed	his	interest	with	a	polite	nod	and	filled	up	the man’s	glass	from	the	purple	jug.	But	Fanucci	thought	better	of	what	he	was going	to	say	and	rose	from	his	chair	and	shook	Vito’s	hand.	“Good	night,	young fellow,”	he	said.	“No	hard	feelings,	eh?	If	I	can	ever	do	you	a	service	let	me know.	You’ve	done	a	good	job	for	yourself	tonight.”
																Vito	let	Fanucci	go	down	the	stairs	and	out	the	building.	The	street was	thronged	with	witnesses	to	show	that	he	had	left	the	Corleone	home	safely. Vito	watched	from	the	window.	He	saw	Fanucci	turn	the	corner	toward	Fifth Avenue	and	knew	he	was	headed	toward	his	apartment,	probably	to	put	away	his loot	before	coming	out	on	the	streets	again.	Perhaps	to	put	away	his	gun.	Vito Corleone	left	his	apartment	and	ran	up	the	stairs	to	the	roof.	He	traveled	over	the square	block	of	roofs	and	descended	down	the	steps	of	an	empty	loft	building fire	escape	that	left	him	in	the	back	yard.	He	kicked	the	back	door	open	and	went through	the	front	door.	Across	the	street	was	Fanucci’s	tenement	apartment house.
																The	village	of	tenements	extended	only	as	far	west	as	Tenth	Avenue. Eleventh	Avenue	was	mostly	warehouses	and	lofts	rented	by	firms	who	shipped by	New	York	Central	Railroad	and	wanted	access	to	the	freight	yards	that honeycombed	the	area	from	Eleventh	Avenue	to	the	Hudson	River.	Fanucci’s apartment	house	was	one	of	the	few	left	standing	in	this	wilderness	and	was
occupied	mostly	by	bachelor	trainmen,	yard	workers,	and	the	cheapest prostitutes.	These	people	did	not	sit	in	the	street	and	gossip	like	honest	Italians, they	sat	in	beer	taverns	guzzling	their	pay.	So	Vito	Corleone	found	it	an	easy matter	to	slip	across	the	deserted	Eleventh	Avenue	and	into	the	vestibule	of Fanucci’s	apartment	house.	There	he	drew	the	gun	he	had	never	fired	and	waited for	Fanucci.
																He	watched	through	the	glass	door	of	the	vestibule,	knowing	Fanucci would	come	down	from	Tenth	Avenue.	Clemenza	had	showed	him	the	safety	on the	gun	and	he	had	triggered	it	empty.	But	as	a	young	boy	in	Sicily	at	the	early age	of	nine,	he	had	often	gone	hunting	with	his	father,	had	often	fired	the	heavy shotgun	called	the	lupara.	It	was	his	skill	with	the	lupara	even	as	a	small	boy that	had	brought	the	sentence	of	death	upon	him	by	his	father’s	murderers.
																Now	waiting	in	the	darkened	hallway,	he	saw	the	white	blob	of Fanucci	crossing	the	street	toward	the	doorway.	Vito	stepped	back,	shoulders pressed	against	the	inner	door	that	led	to	the	stairs.	He	held	his	gun	out	to	fire. His	extended	hand	was	only	two	paces	from	the	outside	door.	The	door	swung in.	Fanucci,	white,	broad,	smelly,	filled	the	square	of	light.	Vito	Corleone	fired.
																The	opened	door	let	some	of	the	sound	escape	into	the	street,	the	rest of	the	gun’s	explosion	shook	the	building.	Fanucci	was	holding	on	to	the	sides	of the	door,	trying	to	stand	erect,	trying	to	reach	for	his	gun.	The	force	of	his struggle	had	torn	the	buttons	off	his	jacket	and	made	it	swing	loose.	His	gun	was exposed	but	so	was	a	spidery	vein	of	red	on	the	white	shirt	front	of	his	stomach. Very	carefully,	as	if	he	were	plunging	a	needle	into	a	vein,	Vito	Corleone	fired his	second	bullet	into	that	red	web.
																Fanucci	fell	to	his	knees,	propping	the	door	open.	He	let	out	a	terrible groan,	the	groan	of	a	man	in	great	physical	distress	that	was	almost	comical.	He kept	giving	these	groans;	Vito	remembered	hearing	at	least	three	of	them	before he	put	the	gun	against	Fanucci’s	sweaty,	suety	cheek	and	fired	into	his	brain.	No more	than	five	seconds	had	passed	when	Fanucci	slumped	into	death,	jamming the	door	open	with	his	body.
																Very	carefully	Vito	took	the	wide	wallet	out	of	the	dead	man’s	jacket