		His	analysis	proved	correct.	Woltz	kept	him	waiting	for	a	half	hour past	the	appointed	time.	Hagen	didn’t	mind.	The	reception	room	was	very	plush, very	comfortable,	and	on	a	plum-colored	couch	opposite	him	sat	the	most beautiful	child	Hagen	had	ever	seen.	She	was	no	more	than	eleven	or	twelve, dressed	in	a	very	expensive	but	simple	way	as	a	grown	woman.	She	bad incredibly	golden	hair,	huge	deep	sea-blue	eyes	and	a	fresh	raspberry-red	mouth. She	was	guarded	by	a	woman	obviously	her	mother,	who	tried	to	stare	Hagen down	with	a	cold	arrogance	that	made	him	want	to	punch	her	in	the	face.	The angel	child	and	the	dragon	mother,	Hagen	thought,	returning	the	mother’s	cold stare.
																Finas	q	an	exquisitely	dressed	but	stout	middle-aged	woman	came	to lead	him	through	a	string	of	offices	to	the	office-apartment	of	the	movie producer.	Hagen	was	impressed	by	the	beauty	of	the	offices	and	the	people working	in	them.	He	smiled.	They	were	all	shrewdies,	trying	to	get	their	foot	in the	movie	door	by	taking	office	jobs,	and	most	of	them	would	work	in	these offices	for	the	rest	of	their	lives	or	until	they	accepted	defeat	and	returned	to their	home	towns.
																Jack	Woltz	was	a	tall,	powerfully	built	man	with	a	heavy	paunch almost	concealed	by	his	perfectly	tailored	suit.	Hagen	knew	his	history.	At	ten years	of	age	Woltz	had	hustled	empty	beer	kegs	and	pushcarts	on	the	East	Side. At	twenty	he	helped	his	father	sweat	garment	workers.	At	thirty	he	had	left	New York	and	moved	West,	invested	in	the	nickelodeon	and	pioneered	motion pictures.	At	forty-eight	he	had	been	the	most	powerful	movie	magnate	in Hollywood,	still	rough-spoken,	rapaciously	amorous,	a	raging	wolf	ravaging helpless	flocks	of	young	starlets.	At	fifty	he	transformed	himself.	He	took	speech lessons,	learned	how	to	dress	from	an	English	valet	and	how	to	behave	socially from	an	English	butler.	When	his	first	wife	died	he	married	a	world-famous	and beautiful	actress	who	didn’t	like	acting.	Now	at	the	age	of	sixty	he	collected	old master	paintings,	was	a	member	of	the	President’s	Advisory	Committee,	and	had set	up	a	multimillion-dollar	foundation	in	his	name	to	promote	art	in	motion pictures.	His	daughter	had	married	an	English	lord,	his	son	an	Italian	princess.
																His	latest	passion,	as	reported	dutifully	by	every	movie	columnist	in America,	was	his	own	racing	stables	on	which	he	had	spent	ten	million	dollars	in
the	past	year.	He	had	made	headlines	by	purchasing	the	famed	English	racing horse	Khartoum	for	the	incredible	price	of	six	hundred	thousand	dollars	and	then announcing	that	the	undefeated	racer	would	be	retired	and	put	to	stud exclusively	for	the	Woltz	stables.
																He	received	Hagen	courteously,	his	beautifully,	evenly	tanned, meticulously	barbered	face	contorted	with	a	grimace	meant	to	be	a	smile. Despite	all	the	money	spent,	despite	the	ministrations	of	the	most	knowledgeable technicians,	his	age	showed;	the	flesh	of	his	face	looked	as	if	it	had	been	seamed together.	But	there	was	an	enormous	vitality	in	his	movements	and	he	had	what Don	Corleone	had,	the	air	of	a	man	who	commanded	absolutely	the	world	in which	he	lived.
																Hagen	came	directly	to	the	point.	That	he	was	an	emissary	from	a friend	of	Johnny	Fontane.	That	this	friend	was	a	very	powerful	man	who	would pledge	his	gratitude	and	undying	friendship	to	Mr.	Woltz	if	Mr.	Woltz	would grant	a	small	favor.	The	small	favor	would	be	the	casting	of	Johnny	Fontane	in the	new	war	movie	the	studio	planned	to	start	next	week.
																The	seamed	face	was	impassive,	polite.	“What	favors	can	your	friend do	me?”	Woltz	asked.	There	was	just	a	trace	of	condescension	in	his	voice.
																Hagen	ignored	the	condescension.	He	explained.	“You’ve	got	some labor	trouble	coming	up.	My	friend	can	absolutely	guarantee	to	make	that trouble	disappear.	You	have	a	top	male	star	who	makes	a	lot	of	money	for	your studio	but	he	just	graduated	from	marijuana	to	heroin.	My	friend	will	guarantee that	your	male	star	won’t	be	able	to	get	any	more	heroin.	And	if	some	other	little things	come	up	over	the	years	a	phone	call	to	me	can	solve	your	problems.”
																Jack	Woltz	listened	to	this	as	if	he	were	hearing	the	boasting	of	a child.	Then	he	said	harshly,	his	voice	deliberately	all	East	Side,	“You	trying	to put	muscle	on	me?”
																Hagen	said	coolly,	“	Absolutely	not.	I’ve	come	to	ask	a	service	for	a friend.	I’ve	tried	to	explain	that	you	won’t	lose	anything	by	it.”
																Almost	as	if	he	willed	it,	Woltz	made	his	face	a	mask	of	anger.	The mouth	curled,	his	heavy	brows,	dyed	black,	contracted	to	form	a	thick	line	over his	glinting	eyes.	He	leaned	over	the	desk	toward	Hagen.”	All	right,	you	smooth son	of	a	bitch,	let	me	lay	it	on	the	line	for	you	and	your	boss,	whoever	he	is. Johnny	Fontane	never	gets	that	movie.	I	don’t	care	how	many	guinea	Mafia goombahs	come	out	of	the	woodwork.”	He	leaned	back.	“A	word	of	advice	to you,	my	friend.	J.	Edgar	Hoover,	I	assume	you’ve	heard	of	him”--Woltz	smiled sardonically--”is	a	personal	friend	of	mine.	If	I	let	him	know	I’m	being pressured,	you	guys	will	never	know	what	hit	you.”
																Hagen	listened	patiently.	He	had	expected	better	from	a	man	of Woltz’s	stature.	Was	it	possible	that	a	man	who	acted	this	stupidly	could	rise	to the	head	of	a	company	worth	hundreds	of	millions?	That	was	something	to	think about	since	the	Don	was	looking	for	new	things	to	put	money	into,	and	if	the	top brains	of	this	industry	were	so	dumb,	movies	might	be	the	thing.	The	abuse	itself bothered	him	not	at	all.	Hagen	had	learned	the	art	of	negotiation	from	the	Don himself.	“Never	get	angry,”	the	Don	had	instructed.	“Never	make	a	threat. Reason	with	people.”	The	word	“reason”	sounded	so	much	better	in	Italian, ragione,	to	rejoin.	The	art	of	this	was	to	ignore	all	insults,	all	threats;	to	turn	the other	cheek.	Hagen	had	seen	the	Don	sit	at	a	negotiating	table	for	eight	hours, swallowing	insults,	trying	to	persuade	a	notorious	and	megalomaniac	strong-arm man	to	mend	his	ways.	At	the	end	of	the	eight	hours	Don	Corleone	had	thrown up	his	hands	in	a	helpless	gesture	and	said	to	the	other	men	at	the	table,	“But	no one	can	reason	with	this	fellow,”	and	had	stalked	out	of	the	meeting	room.	The strong-arm	man	had	turned	white	with	fear.	Emissaries	were	sent	to	bring	the Don	back	into	the	room.	An	agreement	was	reached	but	two	months	later	the strong-arm	was	shot	to	death	in	his	favorite	barbershop.
																So	Hagen	started	again,	speaking	in	the	most	ordinary	voice.	“Look	at my	card,”	he	said.	“I’m	a	lawyer.	Would	I	stick	my	neck	out?	Have	I	uttered	one threatening	word?	Let	me	just	say	that	I	am	prepared	to	meet	any	condition	you name	to	get	Johnny	Fontane	that	movie.	I	think	I’ve	already	offered	a	great	deal for	such	a	small	favor.	A	favor	that	I	understand	it	would	be	in	your	interest	to grant.	Johnny	tells	me	that	you	admit	he	would	be	perfect	for	that	part.	And	let me	say	that	this	favor	would	never	be	asked	if	that	were	not	so.	In	fact,	if	you’re worried	about	your	investment,	my	client	would	finance	the	picture.	But	please let	me	make	myself	absolutely	clear.	We	understand	your	no	is	no.	Nobody	can
force	you	or	is	trying	to.	We	know	about	your	friendship	with	Mr.	Hoover,	I	may add,	and	my	boss	respects	you	for	it.	He	respects	that	relationship	very	much.”
																Woltz	had	been	doodling	with	a	huge,	red-feathered	pen.	At	the mention	of	money	his	interest	was	aroused	and	he	stopped	doodling.	He	said patronizingly,	“This	picture	is	budgeted	at	five	million.”
																Hagen	whistled	softly	to	show	that	he	was	impressed.	Then	he	said very	casually,	“My	boss	has	a	lot	of	friends	who	back	his	judgment.”
																For	the	first	time	Woltz	seemed	to	take	the	whole	thing	seriously.	He studied	Hagen’s	card.	“I	never	heard	of	you,”	he	said.	“I	know	most	of	the	big lawyers	in	New	York,	but	just	who	the	hell	are	you?”
																“I	have	one	of	those	dignified	corporate	practices,”	Hagen	said	dryly. “I	just	handle	this	one	account.”	He	rose.	“I	won’t	take	up	any	more	of	your time.”	He	held	out	his	hand,	Woltz	shook	it.	Hagen	took	a	few	steps	toward	the door	and	turned	to	face	Woltz	again.	“I	understand	you	have	to	deal	with	a	lot	of people	who	try	to	seem	more	important	than	they	are.	In	my	case	the	reverse	is true.	Why	don’t	you	check	me	out	with	our	mutual	friend?	If	you	reconsider,	call me	at	my	hotel.”	He	paused.	“This	may	be	sacrilege	to	you,	but	my	client	can	do things	for	you	that	even	Mr.	Hoover	might	find	out	of	his	range.”	He	saw	the movie	producer’s	eyes	narrowing.	Woltz	was	finally	getting	the	message.	“By the	way,	I	admire	your	pictures	very	much,”	Hagen	said	in	the	most	fawning voice	he	could	manage.	“I	hope	you	can	keep	up	the	good	work.	Our	country needs	it;	“
																Late	that	afternoon	Hagen	received	a	call	from	the	producer’s secretary	that	a	car	would	pick	him	up	within	the	hour	to	take	him	out	to	Mr. Woltz’s	country	home	for	dinner.	She	told	him	it	would	be	about	a	three-hour drive	but	that	the	car	was	equipped	with	a	bar	and	some	hors	d’oeuvres.	Hagen knew	that	Woltz	made	the	trip	in	his	private	plane	and	wondered	why	he	hadn’t been	invited	to	make	the	trip	by	air.	The	secretary’s	voice	was	adding	politely, “Mr.	Woltz	suggested	you	bring	an	overnight	bag	and	he’ll	get	you	to	the	airport in	the	morning.”
																“I’ll	do	that,”	Hagen	said.	That	was	another	thing	to	wonder	about. How	did	Woltz	know	he	was	taking	the	morning	plane	back	to	New	York?	He thought	about	it	for	a	moment.	The	most	likely	explanation	was	that	Woltz	had set	private	detectives	on	his	trail	to	get	all	possible	information.	Then	Woltz certainly	knew	he	represented	the	Don,	which	meant	that	he	knew	something about	the	Don,	which	in	turn	meant	that	he	was	now	ready	to	take	the	whole matter	seriously.	Something	might	be	done	after	all,	Hagen	thought.	And	maybe Woltz	was	smarter	than	he	had	appeared	this	morning.
	
																The	home	of	Jack	Woltz	looked	like	an	implausible	movie	set.	There was	a	plantation-type	mansion,	huge	grounds	girdled	by	a	rich	black-dirt	bridle path,	stables	and	pasture	for	a	herd	of	horses.	The	hedges,	flower	beds	and grasses	were	as	carefully	manicured	as	a	movie	star’s	nails.
																Woltz	greeted	Hagen	on	a	glass-paneled	air-conditioned	porch.	The producer	was	informally	dressed	in	blue	silk	shirt	open	at	the	neck,	mustardcolored	slacks,	soft	leather	sandals.	Framed	in	all	this	color	and	rich	fabric	his seamed,	tough	face	was	startling.	He	handed	Hagen	an	outsized	martini	glass and	took	one	for	himself	from	the	prepared	tray.	He	seemed	more	friendly	than he	had	been	earlier	in	the	day.	He	put	his	arm	over	Hagen’s	shoulder	and	said, “We	have	a	little	time	before	dinner,	let’s	go	look	at	my	horses.”	As	they	walked toward	the	stables	he	said,	“I	checked	you	out,	Tom;	you	should	have	told	me your	boss	is	Corleone.	I	thought	you	were	just	some	third-rate	hustler	Johnny was	running	in	to	bluff	me.	And	I	don’t	bluff.	Not	that	I	want	to	make	enemies,	I never	believed	in	that.	But	let’s	just	enjoy	ourselves	now.	We	can	talk	business after	dinner.”
																Surprisingly	Woltz	proved	to	be	a	truly	considerate	host.	He	explained his	new	methods,	innovations	that	he	hoped	would	make	his	stable	the	most successful	in	America.	The	stables	were	all	fire-proofed,	sanitized	to	the	highest degree,	and	guarded	by	a	special	security	detail	of	private	detectives.	Finally Woltz	led	him	to	a	stall	which	had	a	huge	bronze	plaque	attached	to	its	outside wall.	On	the	plaque	was	the	name	“Khartoum.”
																The	horse	inside	the	stall	was,	even	to	Hagen’s	inexperienced	eyes,	a beautiful	animal.	Khartoum’s	skin	was	jet	black	except	for	a	diamond-shaped white	patch	on	his	huge	forehead.	The	great	brown	eyes	glinted	like	golden apples,	the	black	skin	over	the	taut	body	was	silk.	Woltz	said	with	childish	pride, “The	greatest	racehorse	in	the	world.	I	bought	him	in	England	last	year	for	six hundred	grand.	I	bet	even	the	Russian	Czars	never	paid	that	much	for	a	single horse.	But	I’m	not	going	to	race	him,	I’m	going	to	put	him	to	stud.	I’m	going	to build	the	greatest	racing	stable	this	country	has	ever	known.”	He	stroked	the horse’s	mane	and	called	out	softly,	“Khartoum,	Khartoum.”	There	was	real	love in	his	voice	and	the	animal	responded.	Woltz	said	to	Hagen,	“I’m	a	good horseman,	you	know,	and	the	first	time	I	ever	rode	I	was	fifty	years	old.”	He laughed.	“Maybe	one	of	my	grandmothers	in	Russia	got	raped	by	a	Cossack	and I	got	his	blood.”	He	tickled	Khartoum’s	belly	and	said	with	sincere	admiration, “Look	at	that	cock	on	him.	I	should	have	such	a	cock.”
																They	went	back	to	the	mansion	to	have	dinner.	It	was	served	by	three waiters	under	the	command	of	a	butler,	the	table	linen	and	ware	were	all	gold thread	and	silver,	but	Hagen	found	the	food	mediocre.	Woltz	obviously	lived alone,	and	just	as	obviously	was	not	a	man	who	cared	about	food.	Hagen	waited until	they	had	both	lit	up	huge	Havana	cigars	before	he	asked	Woltz,	“Does Johnny	get	it	or	not?”
																“I	can’t,”	Woltz	said.	“I	can’t	put	Johnny	into	that	picture	even	if	I wanted	to.	The	contracts	are	all	signed	for	all	the	performers	and	the	cameras roll	next	week.	There’s	no	way	I	can	swing	it.”
																Hagen	said	impatiently,	“Mr.	Woltz,	the	big	advantage	of	dealing	with a	man	at	the	top	is	that	such	an	excuse	is	not	valid.	You	can	do	anything	you want	to	do.”	He	puffed	on	his	cigar.	“Don’t	you	believe	my	client	can	keep	his promises?”
																Woltz	said	dryly,	“I	believe	that	I’m	going	to	have	labor	trouble.	Goff called	me	up	on	that,	the	son	of	a	bitch,	and	the	way	he	talked	to	me	you’d	never guess	I	pay	him	a	hundred	grand	a	year	under	the	table.	And	I	believe	you	can get	that	fag	he-man	star	of	mine	off	heroin.	But	I	don’t	care	about	that	and	I	can finance	my	own	pictures.	Because	I	hate	that	bastard	Fontane.	Tell	your	boss	this
is	one	favor	I	can’t	give	but	that	he	should	try	me	again	on	anything	else. Anything	at	all.”
																Hagen	thought,	you	sneaky	bastard,	then	why	the	hell	did	you	bring me	all	the	way	out	here?	The	producer	had	something	on	his	mind.	Hagen	said coldly,	“I	don’t	think	you	understand	the	situation.	Mr.	Corleone	is	Johnny Fontane’s	godfather.	That	is	a	very	close,	a	very	sacred	religious	relationship.” Woltz	bowed	his	head	in	respect	at	this	reference	to	religion.	Hagen	went	on. “Italians	have	a	little	joke,	that	the	world	is	so	hard	a	man	must	have	two	fathers to	look	after	him,	and	that’s	why	they	have	godfathers.	Since	Johnny’s	father died,	Mr.	Corleone	feels	his	responsibility	even	more	deeply.	As	for	trying	you again,	Mr.	Corleone	is	much	too	sensitive.	He	never	asks	a	second	favor	where he	has	been	refused	the	first.”
																Woltz	shrugged.	“I’m	sorry.	The	answer	is	still	no.	But	since	you’re here,	what	will	it	cost	me	to	have	that	labor	trouble	cleared	up?	In	cash.	Right now.”
																That	solved	one	puzzle	for	Hagen.	Why	Woltz	was	putting	in	so	much time	on	him	when	he	had	already	decided	not	to	give	Johnny	the	part.	And	that could	not	be	changed	at	this	meeting.	Woltz	felt	secure;	he	was	not	afraid	of	the power	of	Don	Corleone.	And	certainly	Woltz	with	his	national	political connections,	his	acquaintanceship	with	the	FBI	chief,	his	huge	personal	fortune and	his	absolute	power	in	the	film	industry,	could	not	feel	threatened	by	Don Corleone.	To	any	intelligent	man,	even	to	Hagen,	it	seemed	that	Woltz	had correctly	assessed	his	position.	He	was	impregnable	to	the	Don	if	he	was	willing to	take	the	losses	the	labor	struggle	would	cost.	There	was	only	one	thing	wrong with	the	whole	equation.	Don	Corleone	had	promised	his	godson	he	would	get the	part	and	Don	Corleone	had	never,	to	Hagen’s	knowledge,	broken	his	word	in such	matters.
																Hagen	said	quietly,	“You	are	deliberately	misunderstanding	me.	You are	trying	to	make	me	an	accomplice	to	extortion.	Mr.	Corleone	promises	only	to speak	in	your	favor	on	this	labor	trouble	as	a	matter	of	friendship	in	return	for your	speaking	in	behalf	of	his	client.	A	friendly	exchange.	of	influence,	nothing more.	But	I	can	see	you	don’t	take	me	seriously.	Personally,	I	think	that	is	a
mistake.”
																Woltz,	as	if	he	had	been	waiting	for	such	a	moment,	let	himself	get angry.	“I	understood	perfectly,”	he	said.	“That’s	the	Mafia	style,	isn’t	is?	All olive	oil	and	sweet	talk	when	what	you’re	really	doing	is/making	threats.	So	let me	lay	it	on	the	line.	Johnny	Fontane	will	never	get	that	part	and	he’s	perfect	for it.	It	would	make	him	a	great	star.	But	he	never	will	be	because	I	hate	that	pinko punk	and	I’m	going	to	run	him	out	of	the	movies.	And	I’ll	tell	you	why.	He ruined	one	of	my	most	valuable	protégées.	For	five	years	I	had	this	girl	under training,	singing,	dancing,	acting	lessons,	I	spent	hundreds	of	thousands	of dollars.	I	was	going	to	make	her	a	star.	I’ll	be	even	more	frank,	just	to	show	you that	I’m	not	a	hard-hearted	man,	that	it	wasn’t	all	dollars	and	cents.	That	girl	was beautiful	and	she	was	the	greatest	piece	of	ass	I’ve	ever	had	and	I’ve	had	them allover	the	world.	She	could	suck	you	out	like	a	water	pump.	Then	Johnny comes	along	with	that	olive-oil	voice	and	guinea	charm	and	she	runs	off.	She threw	it	all	away	just	to	make	me	ridiculous.	A	man	in	my	position,	Mr.	Hagen, can’t	afford	to	look	ridiculous.	I	have	to	pay	Johnny	off.”
																For	the	first	time,	Woltz	succeeded	in	astounding	Hagen.	He	found	it inconceivable	that	a	grown	man	of	substance	would	let	such	trivialities	affect	his judgment	in	an	affair	of	business,	and	one	of	such	importance.	In	Hagen’s	world, the	Corleones’	world,	the	physical	beauty,	the	sexual	power	of	women,	carried not	the	slightest	weight	in	worldly	matters.	It	was	a	private	affair,	except,	of course,	in	matters	of	marriage	and	family	disgrace.	Hagen	decided	to	make	one last	try.
																“You	are	absolutely	right,	Mr.	Woltz,”	Hagen	said.	“But	are	your grievances	that	major?	I	don’t	think	you’ve	understood	how	important	this	very small	favor	is	to	my	client.	Mr.	Corleone	held	the	infant	Johnny	in	his	arms when	he	was	baptized.	When	Johnny’s	father	died,	Mr.	Corleone	assumed	the duties	of	parenthood,	indeed	he	is	called	‘Godfather’	by	many,	many	people	who wish	to	show	their	respect	and	gratitude	for	the	help	he	has	given	them.	Mr. Corleone	never	lets	his	friends	down.”
																Woltz	stood	up	abruptly.	“I’ve	listened	to	about	enough.	Thugs	don’t give	me	orders,	I	give	them	orders.	If	I	pick	up	this	phone,	you’ll	spend	the	night
in	jail.	And	if	that	Mafia	goombah	tries	any	rough	stuff,	he’ll	find	out	I’m	not	a band	leader.	Yeah,	I	heard	that	story	too.	Listen,	your	Mr.	Corleone	will	never know	what	hit	him.	Even	if	I	have	to	use	my	influence	at	the	White	House.”
																The	stupid,	stupid	son	of	a	bitch.	How	the	hell	did	he	get	to	be	a pezzonovante,	Hagen	wondered.	Advisor	to	the	President,	head	of	the	biggest movie	studio	in	the	world.	Definitely	the	Don	should	get	into	the	movie business.	And	the	guy	was	taking	his	words	at	their	sentimental	face	value.	He was	not	getting	the	message.
																“Thank	you	for	the	dinner	and	a	pleasant	evening,”	Hagen	said. “Could	you	give	me	transportation	to	the	airport?	I	don’t	think	I’ll	spend	the night.”	He	smiled	coldly	at	Woltz.	“Mr.	Corleone	is	a	man	who	insists	on hearing	bad	news	at	once.”
																While	waiting	in	the	floodlit	colonnade	of	the	mansion	for	his	car, Hagen	saw	two	women	about	to	enter	a	long	limousine	already	parked	in	the driveway.	They	were	the	beautiful	twelve-year-old	blond	girl	and	her	mother	he had	seen	in	Woltz’s	office	that	morning.	But	now	the	girl’s	exquisitely	cut mouth	seemed	to	have	smeared	into	a	thick,	pink	mass.	Her	sea-blue	eyes	were filmed	over	and	when	she	walked	down	the	steps	toward	the	open	car	her	long legs	tottered	like	a	crippled	foal’s.	Her	mother	supported	the	child,	helping	her into	the	car,	hissing	commands	into	her	ear.	The	mother’s	head	turned	for	a quick	furtive	look	at	Hagen	and	he	saw	in	her	eyes	a	burning,	hawk-like	triumph. Then	she	too	disappeared	into	the	limousine.
																So	that	was	why	he	hadn’t	got	the	plane	ride	from	Los	Angeles,	Hagen thought.	The	girl	and	her	mother	had	made	the	trip	with	the	movie	producer. That	had	given	Woltz	enough	time	to	relax	before	dinner	and	do	the	job	on	the little	kid.	And	Johnny	wanted	to	live	in	this	world?	Good	luck	to	him,	and	good luck	to	Woltz.
	
																Paulie	Gatto	hated	quickie	jobs,	especially	when	they	involved violence.	He	liked	to	plan	things	ahead.	And	something	like	tonight,	even	though
it	was	punk	stuff,	could	turn	into	serious	business	if	somebody	made	a	mistake. Now,	sipping	his	beer,	he	glanced	around,	checking	how	the	two	young	punks were	making	out	with	the	two	little	tramps	at	the	bar.
																Paulie	Gatto	knew	everything	there	was	to	know	about	those	two punks.	Their	names	were	Jerry	Wagner	and	Kevin	Moonan.	They	were	both about	twenty	years	old,	good-looking,	brown-haired,	tall,	well-built.	Both	were due	to	go	back	to	college	out	of	town	in	two	weeks,	both	had	fathers	with political	influence	and	this,	with	their	college	student	classification,	had	so	far kept	them	out	of	the	draft.	They	were	both	also	under	suspended	sentences	for assaulting	the	daughter	of	Amerigo	Bonasera.	The	lousy	bastards,	Paulie	Gatto thought.	Draft	dodging,	violating	their	probation	by	drinking	in	a	bar	after midnight,	chasing	floozies.	Young	punks.	Paulie	Gatto	had	been	deferred	from the	draft	himself	because	his	doctor	had	furnished	the	draft	board	with documents	showing	that	this	patient,	male,	white,	aged	twenty-six,	unmarried, had	received	electrical	shock	treatments	for	a	mental	condition.	All	false,	of course,	but	Paulie	Gatto	felt	that	he	had	earned	his	draft	exemption.	It	had	been arranged	by	Clemenza	after	Gatto	had	“made	his	bones”	in	the	family	business.
																It	was	Clemenza	who	had	told	him	that	this	job	must	be	rushed through,	before	the	boys	went	to	college.	Why	the	hell	did	it	have	to	be	done	in New	York,	Gatto	wondered.	Clemenza	was	always	giving	extra	orders	instead	of just	giving	out	the	job.	Now	if	those	two	little	tramps	walked	out	with	the	punks it	would	be	another	night	wasted.
																He	could	hear	one	of	the	girls	laughing	and	saying,	“	Are	you	crazy, Jerry?	I’m	not	going	in	any	car	with	you.	I	don’t	want	to	wind	up	in	the	hospital like	that	other	poor	girl.”	Her	voice	was	spitefully	rich	with	satisfaction.	That was	enough	for	Gat	to.	He	finished	up	his	beer	and	walked	out	into	the	dark street.	Perfect.	It	was	after	midnight.	There	was	only	one	other	bar	that	showed light.	The	rest	of	the	stores	were	closed.	The	precinct	patrol	car	had	been	taken care	of	by	Clemenza.	They	wouldn’t	be	around	that	way	until	they	got	a	radio call	and	then	they’d	come	slow.
																He	leaned	against	the	four-door	Chevy	sedan.	In	the	back	seat	two men	were	sitting,	almost	invisible,	although	they	were	very	big	men.	Paulie	said,
“Take	them	when	they	come	out.”
																He	still	thought	it	had	all	been	set	up	too	fast.	Clemenza	had	given	him copies	of	the	police	mug	shots	of	the	two	punks,	the	dope	on	where	the	punks went	drinking	every	night	to	pick	up	bar	girls.	Paulie	had	recruited	two	of	the strong-arms	in	the	family	and	fingered	the	punks	for	them.	He	had	also	given them	their	instructions.	No	blows	on	the	top	or	the	back	of	the	head,	there	was	to be	no	accidental	fatality.	Other	than	that	they	could	go	as	far	as	they	liked.	He had	given	them	only	one	warning:	“If	those	punks	get	out	of	the	hospital	in	less than	a	month,	you	guys	go	back	to	driving	trucks.”
																The	two	big	men	were	getting	out	of	the	car.	They	were	both	exboxers	who	had	never	made	it	past	the	small	clubs	and	had	been	fixed	up	by Sonny	Corleone	with	a	little	loanshark	action	so	that	they	could	make	a	decent living.	They	were,	naturally,	anxious	to	show	their	gratitude.
																When	Jerry	Wagner	and	Kevin	Moonan	came	out	of	the	bar	they	were perfect	setups.	The	bar	girl’s	taunts	had	left	their	adolescent	vanity	prickly. Paulie	Gat	to,	leaning	against	the	fender	of	his	car,	called	out	to	them	with	a teasing	laugh,	“Hey,	Casanova,	those	broads	really	brushed	you	off.”
																The	two	young	men	turned	on	him	with	delight.	Paulie	Gatto	looked like	a	perfect	outlet	for	their	humiliation.	Ferret-faced,	short,	slightly	built	and	a wise	guy	in	the	bargain.	They	pounced	on	him	eagerly	and	immediately	found their	arms	pinned	by	two	men	grabbing	them	from	behind.	At	the	same	moment Paulie	Gatto	had	slipped	onto	his	right	hand	a	specially	made	set	of	brass knuckles	studded	with	one-sixteenth-inch	iron	spikes.	His	timing	was	good,	he worked	out	in	the	gym	three	times	a	week.	He	smashed	the	punk	named	Wagner right	on	the	nose.	The	man	holding	Wagner	lifted	him	up	off	the	ground	and Paulie	swung	his	arm,	uppercutting	into	the	perfectly	positioned	groin.	Wagner went	limp	and	the	big	man	dropped	him.	This	had	taken	no	more	than	six seconds.
																Now	both	of	them	turned	their	attention	to	Kevin	Moonan,	who	was trying	to	shout.	The	man	holding	him	from	behind	did	so	easily	with	one	huge muscled	arm.	The	other	hand	he	put	around	Moonan’s	throat	to	cut	off	any