Costs and benefits can be broken down into four categories: development costs, oper- ational costs, tangible benefits, and intangibles. Development costs are tangible expenses incurred during the construction of the system, such as salaries for the project team, hard- ware and software expenses, consultant fees, training, and office space and equipment. Development costs are usually thought of as one-time costs. Operational costs are tangible costs required to operate the system, such as the salaries for operations staff, software licens- ing fees, equipment upgrades, and communications charges. Operational costs are usually thought of as ongoing costs.
Revenues and cost savings are the tangible benefits the system enables the organization to collect or the tangible expenses the system enables the organization to avoid. Tangible benefits could include increased sales, reductions in staff, and reductions in inventory. Of course, a project also can affect the organization’s bottom line by reaping intangible benefits or incurring intangible costs. Intangible costs and benefits are more difficult to incorporate into the economic feasibility because they are based on intuition and belief rather than “hard numbers.” Nonetheless, they should be listed in the spreadsheet along with the tan- gible items.

Assigning Values to Costs and Benefits Once the types of costs and benefits have been identified, analysts assign specific dollar values to them. This might seem impossible; how can someone quantify costs and benefits that haven’t happened yet? And how can those predictions be realistic? Although this task is very difficult, analysts have to do the best they can to come up with reasonable numbers for all the costs and benefits. Only then can the approval committee make an educated decision about whether or not to move ahead with the project.
The best strategy for estimating costs and benefits is to rely on the people who have the clearest understanding of them. For example, costs and benefits related to the technology or the project itself can be provided by the company’s IT group or external consultants, and business users can develop the numbers associated with the business (e.g., sales projections, order levels). Analysts can also consider past projects, industry reports, and vendor infor- mation, although these approaches probably will be a bit less accurate. All the estimates will probably be revised as the project proceeds.
Sometimes it is acceptable for analysts to list intangible benefits, such as improved customer service, without assigning a dollar value, whereas other times they have to make estimates regarding the value of an intangible benefit. If at all possible, they should quantify intangible costs or benefits. Otherwise, it will not be apparent whether the costs and benefits have been realized. Consider a system that is supposed to improve customer service. This is intangible, but assume that the greater customer service will decrease the number of customer complaints by 10 percent each year over three years and that $200,000 is spent on phone charges and phone operators who handle complaint calls. Suddenly there are some very tangible numbers with which to set goals and measure the original intangible benefit.
Figure 2-5 shows costs and benefits along with assigned dollar values. Notice that the customer service intangible benefit has been quantified based on fewer customer complaint phone calls. The intangible benefit of being able to offer services that competitors currently offer was not quantified, but it was listed so that the approval committee will consider the benefit when assessing the system’s economic feasibility.

Determining Cash Flow A formal cost–benefit analysis usually contains costs and benefits over a selected number of years (usually three to five years) to show cash flow over time
see Figure 2-6). When using this cash-flow method, the years are listed across the top of the spreadsheet to represent the time period for analysis, and numeric values are entered in the appropriate cells within the spreadsheet’s body. Sometimes fixed amounts are entered into the columns. For example, Figure 2-6 lists the same amount for customer complaint calls and inventory costs for all five years. Usually amounts are augmented by some rate of growth to adjust for inflation or business improvements, as shown by the 6 percent increase that is added to the sales numbers in the sample spreadsheet. Finally, totals are added to determine what the overall benefits will be; the higher the overall total, the greater the economic feasi- bility of the solution.

Determining Net Present Value and Return on Investment There are several problems with the cash-flow method—(1) it does not consider the time value of money (i.e., a dollar today is not worth a dollar tomorrow), and (2) it does not show the overall “bang for the buck” that the organization is receiving from its investment. Therefore, some project teams add additional calculations to the spreadsheet to provide the approval committee with a more- accurate picture of the project’s worth.
Net present value (NPV) is used to compare the present value of future cash flows with the investment outlay required to implement the project. For example, if you have a friend who owes you a dollar today but instead gives you a dollar three years from now, you’ve been had! Given a 10 percent increase in value, you’ll be receiving the equivalent of 75 cents in today’s terms.
NPV can be calculated in many different ways, some of which are extremely complex. Figure 2-7 shows a basic calculation that can be used in your cash flow analysis to get more
relevant values. In Figure 2-6, the present value of the costs and benefits are calculated first (i.e., they are shown at a discounted rate). Then, net present value is calculated, and it shows the discounted rate of the combined costs and benefits.
The return on investment (ROI) is a calculation listed somewhere on the spreadsheet that measures the amount of money an organization receives in return for the money it spends. A high ROI results when benefits far outweigh costs. ROI is determined by finding the total benefits less the costs of the system and dividing that number by the total costs of the system (see Figure 2-7). ROI can be determined per year or for the entire project over a period of time. One drawback of ROI is that it considers only the end points of the investment, not the cash flow in between, so it should not be used as the sole indicator of a project’s worth. The spreadsheet in Figure 2-6 shows an ROI figure.
Determining the Break-Even Point If the project team needs to perform a rigorous cost– benefit analysis, it might need to include information about the length of time before the project will break even, or when the returns will match the amount invested in the project.
