To answer these questions, the development team performs work related primarily to the business modeling, requirements, and analysis workflows. In some cases, depending on the technical difficulties that could be encountered during the development of the system, a throwaway prototype is developed. This implies that the design, implementation, and test workflows could also be involved. The project management and environment supporting workflows are very relevant to this phase. The primary deliverables from the inception phase are a vision document that sets the scope of the project; identifies the primary requirements and constraints; sets up an initial project plan; and describes the feasibility of and risks asso- ciated with the project, the adoption of the necessary environment to develop the system, and some aspects of the problem domain classes being implemented and tested.
Elaboration When we typically think about object-oriented systems analysis and design, the activities related to the elaboration phase of the Unified Process are the most relevant. The analysis and design workflows are the primary focus during this phase. The elaboration phase continues with developing the vision document, including finalizing the business case, revising the risk assessment, and completing a project plan in sufficient detail to allow the stakeholders to be able to agree with constructing the actual final system. It deals with gathering the requirements, building the UML structural and behavioral models of the problem domain, and detailing how the problem domain models fit into the evolving system architecture. Developers are involved with all but the deployment engineering workflow in this phase. As the developers iterate over the workflows, the importance of addressing configuration and change management becomes apparent. Also, the development tools acquired during the inception phase become critical to the success of the project during this phase.19 The primary deliverables of this phase include the UML structure and behavior diagrams and an executable of a baseline version of the evolving information system. The baseline version serves as the foundation for all later iterations. By providing a solid founda- tion at this point, the developers have a basis for completing the system in the construction and transition phases.

Construction The construction phase focuses heavily on programming the evolving infor- mation system. This phase is primarily concerned with the implementation workflow. How- ever, the requirements workflow and the analysis and design workflows also are involved with this phase. It is during this phase that missing requirements are identified and the analysis and design models are finally completed. Typically, there are iterations of the workflows during this phase, and during the last iteration, the deployment workflow kicks into high gear. The configuration and change management workflow, with its version-con- trol activities, becomes extremely important during the construction phase. At times, an iteration has to be rolled back. Without good version controls, rolling back to a previous version (incremental implementation) of the system is nearly impossible. The primary deliverable of this phase is an implementation of the system that can be released for beta and acceptance testing.

Transition Like the construction phase, the transition phase addresses aspects typically associated with the implementation phase of a traditional SDLC approach. Its primary focus is on the testing and deployment workflows. Essentially, the business modeling, requirements, and analysis workflows should have been completed in earlier iterations of the evolving information system. Furthermore, the testing workflow will have been

19 With UML comprising fifteen different, related diagramming techniques, keeping the diagrams coordinated and the different versions of the evolving system synchronized is typically beyond the capabilities of a mere mortal systems devel- oper. These tools typically include project management and CASE tools. We describe the use of these tools in Chapter 2.
 

executing during the earlier phases of the evolving system. Depending on the results from the testing workflow, some redesign and programming activities on the design and implementation workflows could be necessary, but they should be minimal at this point. From a managerial perspective, the project management, configuration and change man- agement, and environment are involved. Some of the activities that take place are beta and acceptance testing, fine-tuning the design and implementation, user training, and rolling out the final product onto a production platform. Obviously, the primary deliverable is the actual executable information system. The other deliverables include user manuals, a plan to support the users, and a plan for upgrading the information system in the future.
Workflows
The workflows describe the tasks or activities that a developer performs to evolve an infor- mation system over time. The workflows of the Unified Process are grouped into two broad categories: engineering and supporting.

Engineering Workflows Engineering workflows include business-modeling, requirements, analysis, design, implementation, test, and deployment workflows. The engineering work- flows deal with the activities that produce the technical product (i.e., the information system).

Business Modeling Workflow The business-modeling workflow uncovers problems and identifies potential projects within a user organization. This workflow aids management in understanding the scope of the projects that can improve the efficiency and effectiveness of a user organization. The primary purpose of business modeling is to ensure that both developer and user organizations understand where and how the to-be-developed information system fits into the business processes of the user organization. This workflow is primarily exe- cuted during the inception phase to ensure that we develop information systems that make business sense. The activities that take place on this workflow are most closely associated with the planning phase of the traditional SDLC; however, requirements gathering, and use-case and business process modeling techniques also help us to understand the business situation.

Requirements Workflow In the Unified Process, the requirements workflow includes elic- iting both functional and nonfunctional requirements. Typically, requirements are gathered from project stakeholders, such as end users, managers within the end user organization, and even customers. The requirements workflow is used the most during the inception and elab- oration phases. The identified requirements are very helpful for developing the vision docu- ment and the use cases used throughout the development process. Additional requirements tend to be discovered throughout the development process. In fact, only the transition phase tends to have few, if any, additional requirements identified.

Analysis Workflow The analysis workflow primarily addresses the creation of an analysis model of the problem domain. In the Unified Process, the analyst begins designing the archi- tecture associated with the problem domain; using the UML, the analyst creates structural and behavior diagrams that depict a description of the problem domain classes and their inter- actions. The primary purpose of the analysis workflow is to ensure that both the developer and user organizations understand the underlying problem and its domain without overana- lyzing. If they are not careful, analysts can create analysis paralysis, which occurs when the project becomes so bogged down with analysis that the system is never actually designed or implemented. A second purpose of the analysis workflow is to identify useful reusable classes for class libraries. By reusing predefined classes, the analyst can avoid reinventing the wheel
 

when creating the structural and behavior diagrams. The analysis workflow is predominantly associated with the elaboration phase, but like the requirements workflow, it is possible that additional analysis will be required throughout the development process.

Design Workflow The design workflow transitions the analysis model into a form that can be used to implement the system: the design model. Whereas the analysis workflow concen- trated on understanding the problem domain, the design workflow focuses on developing a solution that will execute in a specific environment. Basically, the design workflow simply enhances the description of the evolving system by adding classes that address the environ- ment of the system to the evolving analysis model. The design workflow uses activities such as detailed problem domain class design, optimization of the evolving information system, database design, user-interface design, and physical architecture design. The design workflow is associated primarily with the elaboration and construction phases of the Unified Process.

Implementation Workflow The primary purpose of the implementation workflow is to create an executable solution based on the design model (i.e., programming). This includes not only writing new classes but also incorporating reusable classes from executable class libraries into the evolving solution. As with any programming activity, the new classes and their interactions with the incorporated reusable classes must be tested. Finally, in the case of multiple groups performing the implementation of the information system, the implementers also must integrate the separate, individually tested modules to create an executable version of the system. The implementation workflow is associated primarily with the elaboration and construction phases.

Testing Workflow The primary purpose of the testing workflow is to increase the quality of the evolving system. Testing goes beyond the simple unit testing associated with the implementation workflow. In this case, testing also includes testing the integration of all modules used to implement the system, user acceptance testing, and the actual alpha test- ing of the software. Practically speaking, testing should go on throughout the development of the system; testing of the analysis and design models occurs during the elaboration and construction phases, whereas implementation testing is performed primarily during the construction and, to some degree, transition phases. Basically, at the end of each iteration during the development of the information system, some type of test should be performed.

Deployment Workflow The deployment workflow is most associated with the transition phase of the Unified Process. The deployment workflow includes activities such as software packaging, distribution, installation, and beta testing. When actually deploying the new sys- tem into a user organization, the developers might have to convert the current data, interface the new software with the existing software, and train the end user to use the new system.

Supporting Workflows The supporting workflows include the project management, con- figuration and change management, and environment workflows. The supporting workflows focus on the managerial aspects of information systems development.

Project Management Workflow Whereas the other workflows associated with the Unified Process are technically active during all four phases, the project management workflow is the only truly cross-phase workflow. The development process supports incremental and iterative development, so information systems tend to grow or evolve over time. At the end of each iteration, a new incremental version of the system is ready for delivery. The project management workflow is quite important owing to the complexity of the two-dimensional
 

development model of the Unified Process (workflows and phases). This workflow’s activities include identifying and managing risks, managing scope, estimating the time to complete each iteration and the entire project, estimating the cost of the individual iteration and the whole project, and tracking the progress being made toward the final version of the evolving information system.

Configuration and Change Management Workflow The primary purpose of the configu- ration and change management workflow is to keep track of the state of the evolving system. In a nutshell, the evolving information system comprises a set of artifacts (e.g., diagrams, source code, and executables). During the development process, these artifacts are modified. A substantial amount of work—and, hence, money—is involved in developing the artifacts. The artifacts themselves should be handled as any expensive asset would be handled—access controls must be put into place to safeguard the artifacts from being stolen or destroyed. Fur- thermore, because the artifacts are modified on a regular, if not continuous, basis, good ver- sion control mechanisms should be established. Finally, a good deal of project management information needs to be captured (e.g., author, time, and location of each modification). The configuration and change management workflow is associated mostly with the construction and transition phases.

Environment Workflow During the development of an information system, the develop- ment team needs to use different tools and processes. The environment workflow addresses these needs. For example, a CASE tool that supports the development of an object-oriented information system via the UML could be required. Other tools necessary include pro- gramming environments, project management tools, and configuration management tools. The environment workflow involves acquiring and installing these tools. Even though this workflow can be active during all of the phases of the Unified Process, it should be involved primarily with the inception phase.
