This chapter primarily describes the project management workflow of the Unified Process. The first step in the process is to identify a project that will deliver value to the business and to create a system request that provides basic information about the proposed system.
Second, the analysts perform a feasibility analysis to determine the technical, economic, and organizational feasibility of the system; if appropriate, the system is selected and the develop- ment project begins. Third, the project manager estimates the functionality of the project and identifies the tasks that need to be performed. Fourth, the manager staffs the project. Finally, the manager identifies the tools, standards, and process to be used; identifies opportunities for reuse; determines how the current project fits into the portfolio of projects currently under development; and identifies opportunities to update the overall structure of the firm’s port- folio of systems current in use.

 

    OBJECTIVES	
 


¦	Understand the importance of linking the information system to business needs.
¦	Be able to create a system request.
¦	Understand how to assess technical, economic, and organizational feasibility.
¦	Be able to perform a feasibility analysis.
¦	Understand how projects are selected in some organizations.
¦	Become familiar with work breakdown structures, Gantt charts, and network diagrams.
¦	Become familiar with use-case–driven effort estimation.
¦	Be able to create an iterative project workplan.
¦	Understand how to manage the scope, refine the estimates, and manage the risk of a project.
¦	Become familiar with how to staff a project.
¦	Understand how the environment and infrastructure workflows interact with the project management workflow.
 

INTRODUCTION	
Most projects occurring in people’s lives, such as weddings or graduation celebrations, require planning and management. Months are spent in advance identifying and per- forming all the tasks that need to get done, such as sending out invitations and selecting a menu, and time and money are carefully allocated among them. Along the way, decisions are recorded, problems are addressed, and changes are made. The increasing popularity of the party planner, a person whose sole job is to coordinate a party, suggests how tough this job can be. In the end, the success of any party has a lot to do with the effort that went into planning along the way. System development projects can be much more complicated than the projects we encounter in our personal lives—usually, more people are involved (e.g., the

41
 

organization), the costs are higher, and more tasks need to be completed. Owing to the complexity of software and software development, it is virtually impossible to “know” all of the possible things that could happen during system development projects. Therefore, it is not surprising that “party planners” exist for information systems projects: They are called project managers.
Project management is the process of planning and controlling the development of a system within a specified time frame at a minimum cost with the right functionality.1 In general, a project is a set of activities with a starting point and an ending point meant to create a system that brings value to the business. A project manager has the primary respon- sibility for managing the hundreds of tasks and roles that need to be carefully coordinated. Today, project management is an actual profession, and analysts spend years working on projects before tackling the management of them. However, in many cases, unreasonable demands set by project sponsors and business managers can make project management very difficult. Too often, the approach of the holiday season, the chance at winning a proposal with a low bid, or a funding opportunity pressures project managers to promise systems long before they are able to deliver them. These overly optimistic timetables are thought to be one of the biggest problems that projects face; instead of pushing a project forward faster, they result in delays. Another source is the changing nature of information technology. An innovation in information technology may look so attractive that organizations embrace projects using this technology without assessing whether the technology adds value to the organization; instead the technology itself seems important in its own right. Problems can usually be traced back to the very beginning of the development of the system, where too little attention was given to identifying the business value and understanding the risks asso- ciated with the project.
During the inception phase of the Unified Process of a new systems development pro- ject, someone—a manager, staff member, sales representative, or systems analyst—typically identifies some business value that can be gained from using information technology. New systems development projects should start from a business need or opportunity. Many ideas for new systems or improvements to existing ones arise from the application of a new tech- nology, but an understanding of technology is usually secondary to a solid understanding of the business and its objectives. This does not mean that technical people should not recom- mend new systems projects. In fact, the ideal situation is for both IT people (i.e., the experts in systems) and business people (i.e., the experts in business) to work closely to find ways for technology to support business needs. In this way, organizations can leverage the exciting innovative technologies that are available while ensuring that projects are based upon real business objectives, such as increasing sales, improving customer service, and decreasing operating expenses. Ultimately, information systems need to affect the organization’s bot- tom line (in a positive way!). To ensure that a real business need is being addressed, the affected business organization (called the project sponsor), proposes the new systems devel- opment project using a system request. The system request effectively kicks off the inception

1 For a very good comprehensive description of project management for information systems, see R.K. Wysocki, Effective Project Management: Traditional, Agile, Extreme, 5th Ed. (Indianapolis, IN: Wiley Publishing, 2009). Also, the Project Management Institute (www.pmi.org) and the Information Systems Community of Practice of the Project Management Institute (is.vc.pmi.org) have valuable resources on information systems pro- ject management. Finally, the following are good books on project management for object-oriented projects:
G. Booch, Object Solutions: Managing the Object-Oriented Project (Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley, 1996); M.
R. Cantor, Object-Oriented Project Management with UML (New York: Wiley, 1998); A. Cockburn, Surviving Object-Oriented Projects: A Manager’s Guide (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1998); I. Jacobson, G. Booch, and J. Rumbaugh, The Unified Software Development Process (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1999); W. Royce, Software Project Management: A Unified Framework (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1998).
 
Project Identification 43

phase for the new systems development project. The request is forwarded to an approval committee for consideration. The approval committee reviews the request and makes an initial determination of whether to investigate the proposal or not. If the committee initially approves the request, the systems development team gathers more information to determine the feasibility of the project.
A feasibility analysis plays an important role in deciding whether to proceed with an information systems development project. It examines the technical, economic, and organi- zational pros and cons of developing the system, and it gives the organization a slightly more detailed picture of the advantages of investing in the system as well as any obstacles that could arise. In most cases, the project sponsor works closely with the development team to develop the feasibility analysis. Once the feasibility analysis has been completed, it is submitted to the approval committee, along with a revised system request. The committee then decides whether to approve the project, decline the project, or table it until additional information is available. Projects are selected by weighing risks and returns and by making trade-offs at the organizational level.
Once the committee has approved a project, the development team must carefully plan for the actual development of the system. Because we are following a Unified Process-based approach, the systems development workplan will evolve throughout the development pro- cess. Given this evolutionary approach, one critical success factor for project management is to start with a realistic assessment of the work that needs to be accomplished and then man- age the project according to that assessment. This can be achieved by carefully creating and managing the workplan, estimating the effort to develop the system, staffing the project, and coordinating project activities.
In addition to covering the above material, this chapter also covers three traditional pro- ject management tools that are very useful to manage object-oriented systems development projects: work breakdown structures, Gantt charts, and network diagrams.


PROJECT IDENTIFICATION	
A project is identified when someone in the organization identifies a business need to build a system. This could occur within a business unit or IT, come from a steering committee charged with identifying business opportunities, or evolve from a recommendation made by external consultants. Examples of business needs include supporting a new marketing campaign, reaching out to a new type of customer, or improving interactions with suppliers. Sometimes, needs arise from some kind of “pain” within the organization, such as a drop in market share, poor customer service levels, or increased competition. Other times, new busi- ness initiatives and strategies are created, and a system is required to enable them.
Business needs also can surface when the organization identifies unique and compet- itive ways of using IT. Many organizations keep an eye on emerging technology, which is technology that is still being developed and is not yet viable for widespread business use. For example, if companies stay abreast of technology such as the augmented reality, games, smart cards, and mobile devices, they can develop business strategies that leverage the capabilities of these technologies and introduce them into the marketplace as a first mover. Ideally, they can take advantage of this first-mover advantage by making money and continuing to innovate while competitors trail behind.
The project sponsor is someone who recognizes the strong business need for a system and has an interest in seeing the system succeed. He or she will work throughout the development process to make sure that the project is moving in the right direction from the perspective of the
 

business. The project sponsor serves as the primary point of contact for the system. Usually, the sponsor of the project is from a business function, such as marketing, accounting, or finance; however, members of the IT area also can sponsor or cosponsor a project.
The size or scope of a project determines the kind of sponsor needed. A small departmental system might require sponsorship from only a single manager, whereas a large organizational initiative might need support from the entire senior management team and even the CEO. If a project is purely technical in nature (e.g., improvements to the existing IT infrastructure or research into the viability of an emerging technology), then sponsorship from IT is appropriate. When projects have great importance to the business yet are technically complex, joint sponsorship by both the business and IT may be necessary.
The business need drives the high-level business requirements for the system. Requirements are what the information system will do, or the functionality it will contain. They need to be explained at a high level so that the approval committee and, ultimately, the project team understand what the business expects from the final product. Business requirements are the features and capabilities the information system will have to include, such as the ability to collect customer orders online or the ability for suppliers to receive inventory information as orders are placed and sales are made.
The project sponsor also should have an idea of the business value to be gained from the system, both in tangible and intangible ways. Tangible value can be quantified and measured easily (e.g., 2 percent reduction in operating costs). An intangible value results from an intui- tive belief that the system provides important, but hard-to-measure, benefits to the organiza- tion (e.g., improved customer service or a better competitive position).
Once the project sponsor identifies a project that meets an important business need and he or she can identify the system’s business requirements and value, it is time to formally initiate the project. In most organizations, project initiation begins with a document called a system request.

System Request
A system request is a document that describes the business reasons for building a system and the value that the system is expected to provide. The project sponsor usually completes this form as part of a formal system project selection process within the organization. Most system requests include five elements: project sponsor, business need, business require- ments, business value, and special issues. The sponsor describes the person who will serve as the primary contact for the project, and the business need presents the reasons prompting the project. The business requirements of the project refer to the business capabilities that the system will need to have, and the business value describes the benefits that the organization should expect from the system. Special issues are included on the document as a catch-all for other information that should be considered in assessing the project. For example, the project may need to be completed by a specific deadline. Project teams need to be aware of any special circumstances that could affect the outcome of the system. Figure 2-1 shows a template for a system request.
The completed system request is submitted to the approval committee for consideration. This approval committee could be a company steering committee that meets regularly to make information systems decisions, a senior executive who has control of organizational resources, or any other decision-making body that governs the use of business investments. The committee reviews the system request and makes an initial determination, based on the information provided, of whether to investigate the proposal or not. If so, the next step is to conduct a feasibility analysis.
