Work Breakdown Structures
A project manager can use a structured, top-down approach whereby high-level tasks are first defined and then broken down into subtasks. For example, Figure 2-12 shows a list of high- level tasks needed to implement a new IT training class. Some of the main steps in the process include identifying vendors, creating and administering a survey, and building new class- rooms. Each step is then broken down in turn and numbered in a hierarchical fashion. There are eight subtasks (i.e., 7.1–7.8) for creating and administering a survey, and there are three subtasks (7.2.1–7.2.3) that make up the review initial survey task. A list of tasks hierarchically numbered in this way is called a work breakdown structure (WBS). The number of tasks and level of detail depend on the complexity and size of the project. At a minimum, the WBS must include the duration of the task, the current status of the task (i.e., open, complete), and the task dependencies, which occur when one task cannot be performed until another task is com- pleted. For example, Figure 2-12 shows that incorporating changes to the survey (task 7.4) takes a week to perform, but it cannot occur until after the survey is reviewed (task 7.2) and pilot tested (task 7.3). Key milestones, or important dates, are also identified on the workplan.
There are two basic approaches to organizing a traditional WBS: by development phase or by product. For example, if a firm decided that it needed to develop a website, the firm could create a WBS based on the inception, elaboration, construction, and transition phases of the Unified Process. In this case, a typical task that would take place during incep- tion would be feasibility analysis. This task would be broken down into the different types of feasibility analysis: technical, economic, and organizational. Each of these would be further broken down into a set of subtasks. Alternatively, the firm could organize the workplan along the lines of the different products to be developed. For example, in the case of a web- site, the products could include applets, application servers, database servers, the various sets of Web pages to be designed, a site map, and so on. Then these would be further decomposed
into the different tasks associated with the phases of the development process. Either way, once the overall structure is determined, tasks are identified and included in the WBS. We return to the topic of WBSs and their use in iterative planning later in this chapter.
Gantt Chart
A Gantt chart is a horizontal bar chart that shows the same task information as the project WBS but in a graphical way. Sometimes a picture really is worth a thousand words, and the Gantt chart can communicate the high-level status of a project much faster and easier than the WBS. Creating a Gantt chart is simple and can be done using a spreadsheet package, graphics software, or a project management package.
First, tasks are listed as rows in the chart, and time is listed across the top in increments based on the needs of the projects (see Figure 2-13). A short project may be divided into

hours or days, whereas a medium-sized project may be represented using weeks or months. Horizontal bars are drawn to represent the duration of each task; the bar’s beginning and end mark exactly when the task will begin and end. As people work on tasks, the appropriate bars are filled in proportionately to how much of the task is finished. Too many tasks on a Gantt chart can become confusing, so it’s best to limit the number of tasks to around twenty or thirty. If there are more tasks, break them down into subtasks and create Gantt charts for each level of detail.
There are many things a project manager can see quickly by looking at a Gantt chart. In addition to seeing how long tasks are and how far along they are, the project manager also can tell which tasks are sequential, which tasks occur at the same time, and which tasks overlap in some way. He or she can get a quick view of tasks that are ahead of schedule and behind schedule by drawing a vertical line on today’s date. If a bar is not filled in and is to the left of the line, that task is behind schedule.
There are a few special notations that can be placed on a Gantt chart. Project mile- stones are shown using upside-down triangles or diamonds. Arrows are drawn between the task bars to show task dependencies. Sometimes, the names of people assigned to each task are listed next to the task bars to show what human resources have been allocated to the tasks.
Network Diagram
A second graphical way to look at project workplan information is the network diagram that lays out the project tasks in a flowchart (see Figure 2-14).
